Available online at http://www.ifgdg.org

Int. J. Biol. Chem. Sci. 15(7): 82-89, December 2021

ISSN 1997-342X (Online), ISSN 1991-8631 (Print)



© 2021 International Formulae Group. All rights reserved. 8686-IJBCS
DOI : https://dx.doi.org/10.4314/ijbcs.v15i7.9S Special issue; AfWA congress
Original Paper http://ajol.info/index.php/ijbcs http://indexmedicus.afro.who.int

Household-level Fluoride reduction from drinking water using crushed fired
clay – proof of concept

E. WOZEI*, B. NASASIRA and B. KUGONZA

Department of Engineering and Environment; Faculty of Engineering, Design and Technology, Uganda
Christian University; PO Box 4, Mukono, Uganda.
* Corresponding author; E-mail: ewozei@ucu.ac.ug; Tel: +256-312-350-232;
ORCID: 0000-0001-9726-5053

Received: 11-08-2020
Accepted: 03-09-2021
Published: 30-12-2021

ABSTRACT

Residents of Bunyangabu District in Uganda have reportedly suffered from cases of dental fluorosis
due to consumption of water with high levels of Fluoride from Ntabago Stream. A household-level sand filter
incorporating crushed fired clay as an adsorbent was designed for a household to reduce the Fluoride
concentration in their drinking water from the natural raw water levels (2-3 mgF/L) to permissible, healthy
levels (0.5-1.0 mg/L). Pieces of fired clay bricks were crushed, and particles of 150 μm to 300 μm in size were
selectively obtained by sieving. Stream water was filtered through replicate model layered filter columns of the
prepared clay, sand (fine sand of 150 μm-2 mm; coarse sand of 2-5 mm), and gravel (6-15 mm). It was found
out that fired clay layers of 2.5 and 5 cm thick reduce the concentration of Fluoride in water by up to 74%, to
less than 1.0 mg/L. This was deduced by evaluating Fluoride concentration in both the clay and water before
and after filtration, using the SPADNS Colorimetric method. Use of crushed fired clay for reduction in
Fluoride concentration in drinking water is the focus of this paper. Additional work will optimise filter design
to improve overall water quality.
© 2021 International Formulae Group. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Defluoridation, filter column, household-level water treatment.


INTRODUCTION
Fluoride is found in all natural waters
at varying concentrations (Djossou et al.,
2015; Hisseien et al., 2015). Seawater
generally contains about 1.0 mg/L, while
rivers and lakes mostly exhibit concentrations
of less than 0.5 mg/L. In groundwater
however, low and high concentration of
Fluorides can occur, depending on the nature
of the rocks and the occurrence of Fluoridebearing rocks (Djossou et al., 2015). Many of
the lakes of the African Rift Valley especially
the soda lakes, have extremely high Fluoride
concentration.
Geographical areas around the world
that have concentrations of Fluoride include
Syria, Jordan, Egypt, Libya, Algeria and
Morocco. It also includes the rift valley area
in Africa from Sudan through Kenya to
Tanzania and Malawi. Another geographical
area extends from Turkey through Iraq, Iran
and Afghanistan to India, northern Thailand
and China. The most affected areas by
Fluoride include India, China and Rift Valley


countries in Africa (Demelash et al., 2019;
Mosonik, 2015).
In Uganda, 6.45% of the water sources
exceed the standard value of Fluoride in
drinking water. The maximum value of
Fluoride in these waters is reported to be 3.31
mg/L and the most affected areas include
volcanic areas of Elgon, Mbale, Moroto and
the Rift Valley of western Uganda (Malago et
al., 2017).
Preliminary tests carried out in October
2018 on water from Ntabago Stream in
Western Uganda showed concentrations of
Fluoride between 2 mg/L to 3 mg/L, which
has led to fluorosis and discolouration of teeth
for the residents consuming the water (Figure
1). According to the Ugandan Standard
(UNBS, 2008), this range is greater than the
permissible levels (0.5 mg/L to 1.0 mg/L for
potable treated water, and 1.5 mg/L for
potable untreated water). This has made the
water unsafe for human consumption due to
high concentration of Fluoride in water (Das
and Mondal, 2016).
The National Water and Sewerage
Corporation (NWSC) has provided piped
water, but because of the cost attached, the
residents prefer free water from this stream to
piped water, which makes them susceptible to
health
risks
associated
with
contamination
(Table
1).
34%
of
the
population in Rwimi Town Council have
access to safe and clean water (MWE, 2018).
This implies that the bigger percentage (66%)
of the population have no access to safe and
clean water. The focus of this study is mainly
on the potential for defluoridation of water
from Ntabago Stream to permissible levels
using crushed fired clay as an adsorbent.
Crushed fired clay was chosen as it is
readily available to households in Uganda
where small scale industries involved in firing
of clay bricks for construction, firing of
pottery, and charcoal stove linings are
common. Other adsorbents have been studied
for fluoride reduction including bone char,
ceramics, and oxides (Djousse Kanouo et al.,
2020; Yadav et al., 2018; Habuda-Stanić et
al., 2014; Madhukar et al., 2014; Loganathan
et al., 2013), but these may not be available at
household level.





Figure 1 Affected residents of the study area showing teeth discolouration.



Table 1: Health impacts of Fluoride in drinking water.

Fluoride (mg/L)
Health Impact
< 0.5
Dental caries
0.5–1.5
Optimum dental health, works against dental caries
1.5–3
Dental fluorosis, blackening and pitting of enamel and teeth from long-term
exposure, mottled enamel, Roentgenographic bone changes, polydipsia
3–8
Skeletal fluorosis, damages foetus, increase in F-concentration in milk, infant
mortality due to calcification of blood vessels, lack of intelligence quotient in
children, osteosclerosis, renal diseases, elevated serum alkaline phosphatase,
stiffness of knees and hips, increased bone mineral density, bone and joint
pains.
10–100
Gastroenteritis, skin irritation, deformation of bones and other skeletal
abnormalities, thyroid changes, growth retardation, kidney damage, crippling
fluorosis.
Compiled from Madhukar et al. (2014)


MATERIALS AND METHODS
Raw water quality
Grab samples of stream water were
collected from three locations along the
Ntabago Stream (Figure 2) for raw water
Fluoride concentration analysis.

Defluoridation model filters
Model
filters
were
prepared
for
defluoridation filter test runs as follows:
Pieces of fired clay bricks were
crushed and sieved to obtain the particles that
pass through a 300 μm sieve and are retained
on a 75 μm sieve. After sieving, the clay was
washed to eliminate very fine particles (dust
of less than 75 μm). Clays reportedly have a
Fluoride adsorption capacity of 84-95 mg/g;
and over 85% adsorption for clays with high
Al and Fe content. Heat treatment (firing)
increases adsorption capacity (Madhukar et
al., 2014).
Sand was washed using clean water
until clean water from it was observed. The
sand was sun dried for two days, and fine sand
and coarse sand portions were obtained after
sieving. Coarse sand and fine sand of 2 mm
to 5 mm, and 150 μm to 2 mm, respectively,
were used.
The gravel to be used was thoroughly
washed with clean water to eliminate dust and
then sun dried, after which gravel of size 6
mm to 15 mm obtained by sieving.
The model filter layers were arranged
with the gravel at the bottom, followed by
coarse sand, then fine sand, and crushed fired
clay at the top. The gravel and sand layers had
a constant thicknesses (5 cm) while the
crushed fired clay had varying layer thickness
(2.5 cm, 5 cm, 7.5 cm) in each of the three
model filters.
A 3 mgF/L solution comprised of
distilled water and Sodium Fluoride (NaF)
was prepared for the model filter test runs.
After stock preparation, the solution was
analyzed to confirm the concentration of
Fluoride ions using SPADNS Colorimetric
Method (APHA/AWWA/WEF, 1999). 750
mL of the 3 mgF/L solution was passed
through the model filter in each test run, and
the filtrate
was analysed for Fluoride
concentration.
The SPADNS Colorimetric Method
was used to determine the concentration of
fluoride in the water before and after
filtration. This Method is based on the
reaction between fluoride and a zirconium-dye


and relies on the fact that when Fluoride
reacts
with
certain
zirconium
dyes,
a
colourless complex anion and a dye are
formed. The complex, which is proportional
to the fluoride concentration, tends to bleach
the
dye
which
therefore
becomes
progressively
lighter
as
the
concentration increases. In the case of the
Fluoride ion reaction with Zr-SPADNS
(sodium
2-(parasulphophenylazo-)-1,8dihydroxy-3,6-naphthalene disulphonate), the
resulting coloured complex is measured in a
spectrophotometer
at
nm
(APHA/AWWA/WEF, 1999; HP, 2000).
To determine the clay-adsorbed portion
of Fluoride, the clay was removed from the
filter and a homogenized sample washed
using 250 mL of 1 M of hydrochloric acid for
1-hour in order to extract Fluoride ions in a
solution. The acid enabled the detaching of
the Fluoride ions from clay particles into the
washing solution (Moon et al., 2015).
After one hour, the suspension was
filtered using a 0.45 μm micropore filter and
the filtrate was then analysed for Fluoride
concentration according to the SPADNS
Colorimetric Method as described above.


Adsorption capacity and effect of adsorbent
layer thickness
Fluoride reduction with tests with
model filters were carried to determined layer
thickness of the adsorbent and the initial
Fluoride ion concentration in the solution was
determined at ambient temperature (~25 °C).
The Fluoride concentration in the filtrate and
fired crushed clay from the filter was
determined using SPADNS Colorimetric
Method. Three model filter setup experiments
were used, and three test runs carried out on
each.
The effect of the adsorbent layer was
investigated by varying the crushed fired clay
layer thicknesses, and spiking the water to be
filtered with 3 mgF/L. The fired clay
thickness in the filters was varied from
between 2 cm to 10 cm (2.5 cm, 5 cm, and 7.5
cm). The concentrations of Fluoride in the
filtrate were determined after each test
(Motora
and
Tesema,
2017).
The
concentration of Fluoride retained in the clay
layer was determined in one of the three test
runs.



Figure 2: A sketch map showing location of sampling points along Ntabago Stream.


RESULTS
Defluoridation test runs
The 2.5 cm and 5 cm crushed fired clay
layer filters were able to reduce to the
Fluoride concentration in the filtered water by
71% and 74% respectively to within the
optimum range for dental health (0.5-1.5
mgF/L), which meets the Uganda National
Standard maximum limit of 1.5 mgF/L
(Figure 3). Other studies with fired clay show
similar reduction levels (Mottora and Tesema,
2017).
The 7.5 cm clay layer filter reduced the
Fluoride levels by 95% to below 0.5 mgF/L
(Figure 3), which is a risk factor for dental
caries. Reduction in the clay-free control was
about 10%. Therefore, the 5 cm clay layer
filter was chosen as a conservative option for
further study.




Figure 3: Defluoridation test runs show reduction of Fluoride to within and below the optimum
range for dental health in filtrate from model filters with a crushed fired clay layer receiving water
spiked with 3 mgF/L.






DISCUSSION
With the 7.5 cm clay layer, 95% of the
Fluoride could be accounted for in the filtered
water and HCl acid-washed clay, which
compares favourably with the findings of
Moon et al., (2015). However, with the 5 cm
and 7.5 cm clay layers only about 70% of the
spiked Fluoride was accounted for at the end
of the test run. It is therefore important to
carry out more tests to account for the
remaining 30% in order to understand the
defluoridation process better, and to determine
how long the clay layer can remain effective
before needing to be replaced.

Filtered water quality
Raw water quality improvement in
other parameters of interest was therefore
checked with a 5 cm clay layer test filter
(Table 2).
While the 5 cm clay layer model filter
reduces Fluoride levels to optimum, and
improves other physicochemical parameters
(Electrical Conductivity), it produces water
which needs still improvement in Apparent
colour, Turbidity and Total Suspended Solids
levels (Table 2). Further optimization of the
sand filter layer thickness is needed for overall
physicochemical and biological water quality
improvement for household level drinking
water treatment. An adaptation of the HACCP
(Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point)
methodology outlined by Gokpeya et al.
(2019) for household level clay water filters
shall form the basis for this assessment.



Table 2: Raw water quality before and after filtration.

Parameters
Units
Initial
quality
Filtrate
quality
Uganda National
Standards for
potable water
Filtered
water
compliance
pH

7.11
7.32
6.5 – 8.5
OK
Electrical Conductivity
μS/cm
≤ 1500
OK
Colour (apparent)
PtCo
≤ 15
High
Turbidity
NTU
≤ 5.0
High
Total Suspended Solids
mg/L
0.0
High


Conclusion
Ntabago Stream has between 2-3 mg
F/L, which is above the National Standard and
above the optimum range for dental health
(0.5-1.5 mgF/L). A crushed fired clay layer of
5 cm thickness in a model filter was adequate
for reducing Fluoride by 74% to the
permissible levels. The filter system was also
effective
at
reducing
water
Turbidity,
Electrical Conductivity, Apparent colour and
Suspended Solids.
Further studies will be done on
optimization of the defluoridation model filter
and process. This would aid in determining
the contact time for optimum Fluoride
reduction,
the
period
after
which
the
adsorption sites are fully saturated, potential
for adsorbent regeneration, maintenance best
practice for the filter system, and the filter
layer requirements for achieving overall safe
drinking water quality at household level.




COMPETING INTERESTS
The authors declare that they have no
competing interests.

AUTHORS’ CONTRIBUTIONS
All
authors
contributed
to
the
conception and design, and analysis. EW was
the principal investigator. BN and BK
contributed to material preparation and data
collection. EW led the manuscript writing and
made revisions.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank F. Okot of the UCU
Quality
Laboratory
for
technical assistance and advice.