The study examined the effect of electronic human resource management practices on
organizational performance. The study was guided by objectives which included; identifying the
existing e-HRM practices in Uganda Clays Limited, establishing challenges faced by Uganda
Clays Limited in implementing e-HRM practices for better organizational performance and
finding out solutions to challenges faced by Uganda Clays Limited in implementing e-HRM
practices for better organizational performance.
The study was carried out using a cross sectional survey research design where both quantitative
and qualitative research approaches were used. The data was collected using questionnaires and
during the data collection, both purposive and simple random sampling methods were used.
Sample sizes of 50 respondents who are staff of Uganda Clays Ltd were also involved.
According to the findings, Uganda Clays Limited employs numerous electronic human resource
management strategies, such as electronic recruitment and selection in which UCL uses
technology for job postings, online applications, and digital screening of candidates. Electronic
Training and Development involves the use of digital platforms for employee training, skill
development, and learning management systems, Electronic welfare where there is adoption of
technology to manage employee benefits, wellness programs, and welfare initiatives. Electronic
employee management systems involves electronic systems are utilized to handle personnel
records, performance appraisals, and HR-related information. Electronic assessment involves
using digital tools to evaluate and assess employee performance. Electronic Idea and Creativity
Exchange system is adopting digital platforms to facilitate idea-sharing and creative
collaboration among employees.
Finally, There are several challenges faced by UCL in implementing E-HRM practices for
example; high costs required needed in the initial implementation of E-HRM practices, limited
knowledge and skills by the employees in the use of the E-HRM practices, security concerns,
organizational internal resistance, slow internet connectivity and inadequate infrastructure to
support implementation of E-HRM practices.

xii

Finally, the study recommends that to fully implement e-HRM in the company, strategies should
be developed to ensure the cross cultural training of the personnel in the HR Department so that
so that they understand other cultural background and people and avoid conflict of interests. The
study also recommends that changes like implementation of e-HRM practices in the workplace
often require the implementation of additional training for workers. HR must first determine
what training is necessary and then implement training measures to ensure all workers can keep
up
with
technical
changes.

CHAPTER ONE