Despite of numerous interventions by both government and development partners, wellbeing of
youths has continued to go down.This study assessed the effect of socio-economic factors on the
wellbeing of the youths in Napak Town Council of Napak district of Karamoja sub region of
North Eastern Uganda. The major objective of this study was to therefore to assess the effect of
socio-economic factors on the wellbeing of the youths in Napak Town Council. Specifically, the
study investigated the effect of unemployment on the wellbeing of the youths in Napak Town
Council in Napak district and assessed the effects of education levels on the wellbeing of the
youth in Napak Town Council in Napak district. It also investigated the effect of income levels
on the wellbeing of the youth in Napak Town Council in Napak district.
The study used cross-sectional design to analyze data from the study area with the help of both
qualitative and quantitative methods. The researcher collected data from 80 respondents in the
study area who were selected using simple random and purpose sampling and questionnaires
together with interview guide were used to collect data from study subjects. The study found that
youths in Napak Town Council who lack jobs have low level of wellbeing and unemployment
has resulted into lack of decent shelter among the youths in Napak Town council. Unemployed
youths in Napak town council do not have access to basic social services and poor health
outcomes are associated with unemployment among youths. Additionally, youths without
education in Napak Town Council do not have formal employment and in Napak town council,
illiterate youths are poor with low levels of wellbeing. Also youths with low education lack skills
for self employment and youths with tertiary education and above have access to basic social
services compared to their counterparts with low education. Other findings indicate that youths
with low incomes in Napak town council have fewer assets and lack of saving among the youths
is associated with low incomes.Lows income levels was also found to contribute to lack of
investment among youths in Napak town council and youths with higher incomes have better
health outcomes. The researcher recommended implementation of programmes and projects that
have direct bearing of youth wellbeing and such programmes should be participatory, inclusive
and sustainable.

CHAPTER ONE