The research was on the financial performance and financial management of business
firms, a case study of Kigezi Pride Bakery in Kabale District. The objectives of the
research were; to determine the impact of budgeting on the financial performance of
Kigezi Pride Bakery, to examine the impact of financial planning on the financial
performance of Kigezi Pride Bakery and to determine the relationship between
financial management and financial performance of business firms. Cross sectional
study design was utilized and data was obtained through interviews and
questionnaires. Findings of the research concerning budget impact on Kigezi Pride
Bakery's financial performance were that budgeting enables Kigezi Pride Bakery to
attain financial objectives, efficient use of resources, and improved decision-making.
It maximizes profitability, efficiency, and co-ordination between departments and
employee participation and innovation. Constant checking should be done to prevent
unrealistic budgets and allow transparency and cooperation. The findings of the
research on evidence related to the impact of financial planning on financial
performance of Kigezi Pride Bakery revealed that financial planning at Kigezi Pride
Bakery encourages goal-setting, budgeting, and resource allocation for stability and
growth. It directs investment, enhances risk management through forecasting, and
allows for cooperation and accountability. The findings of the study on financial
management and business enterprise financial performance were that financial
management improves financial performance by minimizing wastefulness, effective
utilization of resources, and cautious investment choices. It achieves liquidity by
cautious handling of receivables, payables, and cash flows, and cautious financing mix
and risk management guarantee stability and investor confidence. The research hinted
that the organizations adopt systematic financial planning processes to determine

state goals and improve effective utilization of resources for stability and growth and
this will align financial resources with strategic goals to achieve stable growth.

CHAPTER ONE: INTRODUCTION
1.0