Vol. 13(1), pp. 1-12, January-March 2021
DOI: 10.5897/JEIF2020.1093
Article Number: 054911F65534
ISSN 2006-9812
Copyright©2021
Author(s) retain the copyright of this article
http://www.academicjournals.org/JEIF


Journal of Economics and International Finance





Full Length Research Paper

Financial inclusion: Is it a precursor to agricultural
commercialization amongst smallholder farmers in
Uganda? A comparative analysis between Lango and
Buganda sub-regions

Marus Eton1*, Fabian Mwosi2, Mary Ejang3 and Sammy Godfrey Poro4

1Department of Business, Faculty of Economics and Management Science, Kabale University, Kabale, Uganda.
2Department of Postgraduate Studies, Bishop Barham University College, Kabale Uganda.
3Department of Public Administration and Management, Faculty of Management Sciences, Lira University, Lira, Uganda.
4Basic Education and Adolescences Development Section, UNICEF, Uganda.

Received 24 September, 2020; Accepted 17 November, 2020

This
study
examines
the
contributions
of
in
supporting
commercialization amongst smallholder farmers in Uganda in Lango and Buganda sub-regions. The
researcher adopted a comparative study and cross-sectional survey design where descriptive, bivariate
and multivariate data analysis was used. Chi square procedure was run to test the hypothesis that
financial inclusion does not affect agricultural commercialization amongst smallholder farmers in
Lango and Buganda sub-regions. Regression analysis was specifically used to predict the level of
change in agricultural commercialization due to changes in financial inclusion. The study identified
financial inclusion as one variable that can predict the success of agricultural commercialization,
though it varies from one region to another. In Lango, efforts by government to increase financial
access is a positive factor to agricultural commercialization while in Buganda, it is a negative factor. In
Lango, land is communal and not individually owned. Therefore, smallholder farmers need to access
finances to purchase land for commercial farming. In Buganda, however, land is freehold, which makes
smallholder farmers to own chunks of land from their parents. The study has established some
common factors that limit agricultural commercialization in both Lango and Buganda, that is, expensive
equipment and fluctuating prices while poor infrastructure is no longer a big worry. This paper
recommends that, financial service providers should revise their lending terms downwards to reach
smallholder farmers, some of whom lack collateral security to pledge for credit. While the government
takes credit for improving infrastructure, government, through her policy organs like ministry of
agriculture, should provide buffer prices against price fluctuations.

Key words: Financial inclusion, agricultural commercialization, smallholder farmers.


INTRODUCTION

Many agencies, development partners and governments
the world over have adopted financial inclusion as having
the ability to support inclusive transformation in the
community and rural areas (IFAD, 2016). Financial
inclusion is a cross cutting issue where the policy makers
need to develop policies that are linked to those

2 J. Econ. Int. Finance



operating in the financial sector. Demirguc-kunt et al.
(2015) note that adequate progress has been achieved in
raising financial inclusion levels globally where the
unbanked people have drastically reduced by 20% to two
billion in the period 2011-2015.In Uganda, the number of
adults who could access formal financial services rose
from 28% in 2009 to 54% in 2013 (CARE International,
2014). Mobile money brought about a sharp rise in
financial inclusion. This report further reveals that about
15% of the adults have no access to formal financial
services. In 2018, financial inclusion in Uganda stood at
58%, which is almost double of what it was in 2009. The
introduction of Agent Banking in 2016 and shared agent
platform/switch to facilitate access to bank agents in 2018
account for the notable rise in financial inclusion (Alliance
for Financial Inclusion, 2019). However, the position
remains low if compared to the global position of 69% in
2017 and 63% in Sub Saharan Africa. The same report
establishes that 77% of the adults in rural areas have
formal financial inclusion, majority of who are men (63%).
These statistics imply potential contributions of financial
inclusion to the agricultural sector in Uganda, where 43%
of household-based enterprises belong (Uganda Bureau
of Statistics, 2016).
Uganda‟s
economy
predominantly
depends
on
agriculture since the 1920s, where cotton and coffee
accounted for 90% of the total exports (Goobi et al.,
2017). Around the years of independence, economic
growth and development in Uganda was impressive,
growing at an average annual rate of 6.7%. Around the
same period, agriculture contributed more than one-third
of the country‟s GDP. The expansion in the food
processing industries at that time gave rise to this
historical rate of economic growth and development
(Uganda Bureau of Statistics, 2016). From mid-1960s,
Uganda implemented agricultural and lending schemes
that resulted in the establishment of two public sector
banks (Uganda Commercial Bank and Cooperative Bank)
to serve as a conduit for government lending schemes.
These banks made losses for failure to follow commercial
practices (Kilimani, 2007). However, political instability,
poor governance and economic mismanagement that
swept the country in the 1970s and early 1980s saw
Uganda‟s persistent decline in the economy, casting it
among the world‟s poorest and least developed
countries. The real decline in GDP stood at 38%, with a
greater effect on agriculture and trade sectors. The
increasing insecurity at the time and the unattractive
prices paid to farmers affected coffee prices significantly
(Ministry
of
Finance,
Planning
and
Economic
Development, 2010; Brownbridge, 1996; Goobi et al.,
2017). According to Uganda Bureau of Statistics (2016),
agriculture contributed 24.0% to Uganda‟s GDP in 2014/




2015 year and 80% of Uganda‟s exports, with coffee
alone contributing 20% (Goobi et al., 2017).
The integration of smallholder farmers into agricultural
is
significant
to
agriculture‟s
contribution to economic growth thus enhancing financial
inclusiveness. Dehaas (2016) states that Uganda
registered 12 percent of smallholder farmers as the
sellers of farms products and the net buyers stood at 66
percent; therefore, accessibility to the market and
transiting from subsistence farming to commercial
farming can lead to economic growth. Uganda Bureau of
Statistics (UBOS) (2015) observes that agricultural sector
had grown faster by contributing 26 percent from 24
percent to the GDP of Uganda, which is commendable as
after embracing value addition. The importance of
agricultural commercialization has significantly grown
with the development of various strategies, which shifted
from subsistence to commercial (FAO, 2013). Agriculture
provides the primary source of income for the world
economy and supporting agricultural commercialization
may lead to an inclusive model for economic growth.
Gashu et al. (2019) justifiably assert that a significant
investment and creativity in agriculture is highly needed
to achieve a sustainable economic growth. One way
towards sustainable economic growth and development
is
and
stimulating
household incomes. Agriculture commercialization is the
process of transition from subsistence farming to
production-oriented marketing (Pradhan et al., 2010). The
concentrations of commercial agriculture in Uganda
consist of the following: Livestock farming, crop farming,
fishing, forestry and recently horticulture, which have
gained prominence. Majority of the population in Uganda
depend on agriculture for their livelihood. They thus need
an inclusive financial system to accelerate economic
transaction, manage daily resources, improve lifestyle,
and make investment to support growth. The Government
of Uganda has supported agriculture by providing special
incentives which included duty free tax on importation of
plant
and
machinery,
research
and
development
expenditures are exempt, training and capital allowances
on plant and machinery between 50-70% are exempted
(Uganda Investment Authority (UIA), 2015). Agricultural
modernization in Uganda may support change from
subsistence agricultural system to a modern and
commercialized system, though it calls for adoption of
adequate interventions.
Agricultural industry is significant to the society
especially where it accounts for a larger share of the
economic output. Most importantly, financial inclusiveness
has not been emphasized in support to small holder
commercialization of agriculture. Insufficient amount of
commercialization of agriculture. Insufficient amount of

*Corresponding author. E-mail: emarus@kab.ac.ug, eton.marus@gmail.com.

Author(s) agree that this article remain permanently open access under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution
License 4.0 International License





money has always been exerted to promote agricultural
sustainability
and
development
and
majority
of
and
entrepreneurs
focus
on
production and technology which has not been consistent
(Seidel et al., 2013). Agricultural financial sector has also
been associated to the land rush growing globally.
Fairbairn (2014) argues that financial investors intending
to acquire land for large scale farming is on the rise and
this is a major challenge facing commercial farmers.
These challenges are unique to smallholder commercial
agriculturalist and financial institution face similar hurdles,
which may include but not limited to high transaction
costs, regulatory framework and unfavorable climatic
environment (IFC, 2012). The market dynamics currently
faced by smallholder farmers does not support market
access
for
the
rural
dwellers
thus
undermining
agricultural commercialization.
Economists
and
agriculturalist
have
linked
the
challenges in adopting innovation and technology in
agricultural sector to access to credit. FAO (2015)
establishes that inadequate infrastructure in the rural
areas has made it difficult to support processing of
agricultural produce for value addition, and other
produces are perishable like vegetables, fruits, dairy
products and others. Barnett et al. (2008) link the
inadequate
finance,
which
re-enforces
poverty traps, and in essence, advocates for the riskbased finance programs. Despite the increasing attention
and efforts by many developing countries where Uganda
falls, environmental issues not withstanding delays in the
adoption of technology affects smallholder agricultural
commercialization (World Bank, 2016). Much emphasis
on investing resources in domestic or smallholder
agriculture is evident, Uganda‟s spending on agriculture
has continuously declined despite its key role in the
economy. In this respect, the low budget on this sector
has negatively affected it and this affects the research on
value addition, quality and regulation standards. The
challenges
the
two
regions
face
in
commercialization amongst small holder farmers are not
any different from other region. This study will help to
identify key institutional issues that may support the
transformation of smallholder farmers into large scale and
modern agro-processing markets to achieve economic
growth.


Objectives

(i) To establish the relationships between financial
inclusion and agricultural commercialization amongst
smallholder farmers in Lango and Buganda sub-regions
(ii) To assess the role of financial inclusion in supporting
Agricultural
farmers in Lango and Buganda sub-regions.
(iii) To examine the factors hindering the growth of
agricultural commercialization amongst the smallholder
Eton et al. 3



farmers in of Lango and Buganda sub-regions.


Hypothesis

does
not
commercialization amongst smallholder farmers in Lango
and Buganda sub-regions.


LITERATURE REVIEW

Conceptualizing financial inclusion

Financial inclusion (FI) is the provision of affordable,
timely and appropriately regulated access to financial
services and products to all categories of people with the
aim of improving and promoting the well-being of the
population (OECD/INFE, 2012).The usage, adequacy,
convenience,
product
knowledge,
affordability
and
accessibility are some of the factors brought forward by
many authors in describing financial inclusion (Aro-
Gordon, 2016).Financial inclusion (FI) emerged as a
major player in delivering financial services to the
community and the disadvantaged poor at an affordable
terms and conditions (Iqbal and Sami, 2017). It is
important that the regulators, financial sectors and
government create a conducive and enabling environment
that supports the capacity of financial service providers
through identification of the market demands by designing
affordable products and services, which support financial
inclusion (Arnold and Rhyne, 2016). Uganda has adopted
the usage of mobile money services and technology that
has significantly strengthened financial inclusion amongst
the farmers in the rural and peri-urban areas. Digital cash
transfers are most cost-effective methods of transferring
money to small-scale farmers, which are scattered in
rural areas. Finscope (2018) argues that mobile money
services have driven financial inclusiveness to Ugandans.
Out of the 58% of the population who have access to
formal financial services, only 56% conduct their
transaction through mobile money services.
Accessibility to digital financing is critical for the
transformation of smallholder agricultural sector. Finscope
(2018) states that 22% of Ugandan adults are using
informal channels in accessing financial services whereas
22% are excluded financially therefore meaning that 44%
of Ugandan adults are not getting the deserved services
from the financial sector. Just like other developing
countries in the world, Uganda has adopted the usage of
telephone banking, whose penetration stands at 10%
(Bruhn and Love, 2014). This is still low; however, the
usage is likely to increase if most Ugandans are
continuously sensitized. Callen et al. (2014) note that
technology can improve savings; this can be done by
using mobile point service centers to collect weekly
deposits and this increases higher saving rates and

4 J. Econ. Int. Finance



increases household income. Kast and Pomeranz (2014)
argue that the reduction in the barriers to a formal saving
by individuals offering free bank accounts may result in a
decrease in short term debt and increased ability of
coping with consumption shocks. Serrao et al. (2013)
state that inequality amongst the community is widening
and believed that limited access to financial services is
seen as a factor responsible for the persistent and
widening income inequality and slow economic growth.
UNCDF (2015) notes that policy makers hope that the
rising level of financial inclusiveness would reduce
inequality and raise growth. Kotler and Keller (2015)
observes that there are non-financial institutions legally
operating in the community offering financial products
and services to clients without a regulatory framework
given by a financial authority.
Tania and Adalbert (2018) point out the challenges
associated to financial inclusion that are linked to
unfavorable business environment and ever rising
transaction cost, which makes it very difficult for the
sustainability of formal financial institution. DeOlloqui et
al. (2015) argue that the challenges that limit financial
inclusion are especially those population who are
excluded, and majority are in the rural areas. The rural
environment faces multiple risks such as lower rates for
formal property ownership, which may lead to reduction
in the range of collateral security and these affect the
coverage and the quality of the availability of the
infrastructure (Valenzuela and Cruz, 2017). Access to
financial service providers and bank branches has proved
to be problematic especially to smallholder farmers and
agriculturalist who are based in rural areas where
banking services are not easily available; whereas urban
dwellers can access these financial services as and when
they need them (World Bank, 2015). Credit services,
saving and member‟s deposits remain the basic financial
services, which can be accessible while others are
outreach like networks and retail location (World Bank,
2014). Financial experts argue that access to a
reasonable credit, at affordable rates to the poor will
increase financial inclusiveness to the disadvantaged
poor (Abdulkareem, 2019).It is significant to note that
financial exclusion in developing countries affects mostly
the rural dwellers and therefore it is important to applause
the contribution of informal financial lenders in filling this
gap. Therefore the concerned authority should provide a
monitoring and supervisory role to protect the borrowers
(Eton et al., 2019). Similarly, Akinlo (2014) establishes
that access to financial services is a major role in the
development of the rural poor by increasing income and
facilitating investment in various sectors creates an
opportunity for employment therefore reducing the
vulnerability of the poor. Tambi (2018) states that
development partners, private sector especially formal
financial institution and governments should sensitize the
smallholder farmers on the availability and existence of
financial services.




Conceptualizing agricultural commercialization

Agricultural development economics establishes ways of
breakthrough from semi-subsistence methods (in which
smallholders are trapped) to the modern ways of farming
which is commercial in nature (Muamba, 2011).The
process involving transforming agricultural practices from
the rudimentary subsistence farming to commercial
farming is agricultural commercialization (Justus et al.,
2016). Smallholder farmers can engage in agricultural
commercialization if given all the necessary support thus,
contributing to economic growth of the economy.
Agricultural commercialization operates in two folds: the
one, which includes food crops and the one of cash
crops, which allows for production diversity (Jennifer and
Tina, 2014). The current agricultural commercialization or
enterprise requires investing heavily on the equipment
and guard against risk associated with uncertainties from
natural disasters like droughts and floods. IPCC (2012)
argues that farmers in sub-Saharan Africa, Uganda
inclusive suffer climatic change that affects agricultural
production capacity. Importantly, agriculture in Uganda is
largely rainfed therefore farmers are vulnerable to
drought and floods. Climatic change has proved to be a
global phenomenon that greatly affects agricultural
production by causing variation in weather patterns,
drought and alterations in pests and diseases and the
extent of its adversity would depend on the adaptability
capacity of the farmers (Gornall et al., 2010).To increase
the income of smallholder farmers in developing
countries, agricultural commercialization should focus on
developing better policies that supports commercialization
of smallholder agriculture (Muriithi and Matz, 2015).
Smallholder agricultural commercialization faces various
challenges, which among others include inadequate
financing for long-term growth. This is a serious
challenge in the agricultural growth sector where
agriculture has turned to be capital-intensive industry
(Eraskine, 2014). Limited farmlands and variation in
climatic conditions are some of the major challenges
faced by smallholder farmers who are involved in
commercial agriculture (Tambi, 2018). Technological
barriers have posed as a challenge to agricultural
commercialization that may prevent smallholder farmer‟s
access to credit, thus limiting productivity and income
generation
(Levine,
2005).
Whereas
technologies
effectively support agricultural commercialization, inability
to access capital especially among the underprivileged
rural dwellers hinders smallholder farmers in developing
countries from adopting them (Shiferaw et al., 2015).
Smallholder farmers with smaller plots are often
constrained by their inability to invest in modern inputs,
which affects their income. EKN (2015) observes that
small-scale farmers cannot use tractors since farmers
cannot afford the technology. As an intervention, the
adoption of technology has helped link the smallholder
farmers and markets and this has enhanced the





productivity by different farmers (GOP, 2015). Innovations
in the agricultural sector is significant in lowering per unit
cost, reduces hunger and therefore boosting the income
of the rural dwellers (Maertens and Barrett, 2013).
Access to usage of technology, land, infrastructure and
adequate amount of rainfall significantly affects the
decision of farmers in agricultural commercialization
(Olwande et al., 2015). The continuous usages of poor
technology, poor quality seeds, pesticides and fertilizers
by smallholder farmers have greatly affected the
production and markets prices. Herrmann (2017) argues
that using modern farming techniques and technology
can lead to production of good quality products with high
demand in the market and these increase their income
levels. This therefore changes the conditions of input and
output prices, marketing systems, transaction cost and
the risks that farmers anticipate.
Gebremedhin and Jaleta (2010) state that agricultural
production has been hit by falling prices of agricultural
products, inadequate technology, lack of infrastructure
and inefficient marketing institutions that cause a high
risk to household income. Woolverton et al. (2014)
observe that smallholder farmers have continued to
engage in subsistence agriculture, which is less
profitable, and therefore cannot reap from the benefits
arising from agricultural commercialization. Gashu et al.
(2019) note that new initiatives, reforms in policies and
initiatives
should
be
supported
while
appropriate
investments needed to be developed which supports
agricultural innovation and growth. AGRA (2016) argues
that a number of interventions have been made by
various bodies that led to the transformation of
smallholder farmers into a major source of income,
employment and food for consumption. Smallholder
lack
links
to
the
markets
locally
and
internationally, making them more prone to exploitation
by intermediaries. The public and private sector ought to
contribute towards agricultural commercialization through
offering financial incentives and training (Kabiti et al.,
2016).It is important to note that formation of agricultural
cooperatives or partnership by farmers with already
established farmers supports markets commercialization
(Bitzernd
and
Bijman,
2014)
although
poor
and
smallholder farmers could be left out on the argument
that their relevance is not felt. Olwande et al. (2015)
argue that improving markets accessibility and reduction
of costs affects positively the smallholder farmers market
participation which my lead to marketable surplus of their
produce. The approach of improving smallholder farming
methods and improved accessibility to the market
transforms the household economic status (Yusuf et al.,
2018). The integration of cash generating crops to the
line of various crops produced by smallholder farmers will
increase their level of income and this motivates them
(Rubhara and Mudhara, 2019). There is much support
still needed for sustainability and transformation of
agricultural processes in the sub-Saharan Africa to meet
Eton et al. 5



the sustainable development goals.


and

The recent trends in developing nations have seen
farmers engage in agricultural commercialization, and
adoption of financial flows into less risky industries and
corporations indicates that farmers are highly indebted
and therefore creating avenues for financial partnerships
(Sippel et al., 2017). Better financial services should
improve financial accessibility to the poor, which provides
support for a sound and safe spread of better modes of
financial service delivery that can easily reach the poor
and upscale the successful models for poor households
to embrace agricultural commercialization. Soederberg
(2013) notes that financialization is expanding into areas
beyond
traditional
export
nation
as
international
organizations
are
promoting
inclusiveness in most of the developing nations as a tool
for development of agriculture and growth. Most
development agencies and banks encourage private
financing
to
support
commercialization (Aitken, 2013). The government of
Uganda, its agencies and private sector have developed
strategies to aid the poor improve on agricultural
commercialization in both rural and peri urban areas and
this has increased incomes for the poor. The World Bank
(2014) notes the critical areas where governments have
to focus on lowering credit exposure to the agricultural
sector and the supply chain and much concentration
should be in the geographical disadvantaged areas,
financial infrastructures and inadequate training amongst
the smallholder commercial farmers regarding financial
products and services. By lowering transaction cost in the
agricultural sectors, money transfers and mobile money,
users ought to protect farmers against any risks (Jack
and Suri, 2014). The usage of mobile money services by
smallholder farmers is associated with increased farm
profits, household income and increased input usage,
which supports agricultural commercialization (Kikulwe et
al., 2014) .The provision of payments, insurance, credits
and savings to the financially disadvantaged and poor at
a reasonable cost remain basic to accessing formal
financial services. Agricultural insurance products helps
commercial farmers address the constraints affecting
them such as limited land for cultivation, inadequate
inputs for investment and risk associated to production
(Norton et al., 2014).The agricultural sector globally
suffers from inadequate financing, which reduces the
potential of the agriculturalist in utilizing agricultural
resources adequately and effectively (Gupta, 2012).
Households can improve their well-being through
additional income from sales of foodstuff for consumption
(Beaman et al., 2014). Investing in farm inputs will
eventually lead to increase in production sales.

6 J. Econ. Int. Finance



Sanfo and Gerard (2012) state that various interventions
can mitigate the adverse effects of poor climatic
conditions. Such initiatives increase access to financial
services at household level, and enhance the adaptability
capacity,
which
would
improve
commercialization. The rural poor communities have
inadequate access and insecure access to natural
resources due to degradation, land fragmentation;
continuous competition for the limited available resources
and unfavorable government policies, which increase
income inequality and financial exclusion among rural
dwellers (Prato and Longo, 2012). The high demands for
collateral by formal financial institutions, high-perceived
risks associated lending to farmers and inadequate
capacity in developing friendly credit instruments for
farmers have led to under capitalization in the agricultural
sector. Financial credit will be a necessity for smallholder
farmers to increase their income and agricultural
productivity although they are facing a challenge to
access credit due to lack of collateral (World Bank, 2015).
Subsistence farmers and smallholder farmers if given
extensive and financial support are most likely to adopt
commercialization of agriculture (Rubhara and Mudhara,
2019). Most clients have stated that high transaction cost
has been a major challenge faced by households in
obtaining credits from formal financial institution such as
loan applications while evaluating collateral security,
monitoring servicing of the loans and these eventually
delays farmers which affects the planting periods (Ali et
al., 2014). Banks assess loan applications for agricultural
commercial farmers by taking into consideration the cash
flow streams and availability of sources of income (ABA,
2014). The reduction to barriers to formal savings by
offering free accounts to individuals would decrease the
short-term debt and increase ability to comply with the
consumption shocks and well-being of the households
(Kast and Pomeranz, 2014). Subsidization of savings by
elimination of minimum balances for the customers will
provide a temporary interest bonus to increase bank
account opening and household income (Schaner, 2015).
Informal financial services have proved to be costly,
restricted farmers in a particular value chain, lack
diversity and this affects the processors and traders who
may be operating at small scale (FAOAcademic de
Centro_ America, 2016).


METHODOLOGY

The researchers adopted a comparative study and cross-sectional
survey design. The opinions, trends and attitudes of the participants
were collected at one point in time on financial inclusion and
agricultural commercialization. This study adopted the qualitative
approach to obtain naturalistic experiences of commercial farmers
in both Lango and Buganda sub-regions. The study adopted the
quantitative approaches to obtain quantifiable information on
commercial farmers that would easily be analyzed and generalized.
Primary and secondary data collection methods were also used in
the study. Secondary data were majorly from government and
private institutions reports.




Close-ended self-administered questionnaires were developed to
provide uniformity of measurement. Bird (2009) states that a
closed-ended question is easily admissible, easy to code and
analyze and therefore produces a complete question that avoids
irrelevant responses. The instrument was pretested on commercial
farmers in some Kayunga district in Buganda sub-region. The
instrument indicated a reliability coefficient of (α =.749). This was
above 0.7, which is acceptable. Therefore, the instrument used was
internally stable. The instrument had 11 items measuring financial
inclusion, 13 items measuring agricultural commercialization, and
11 items describing challenges in agricultural commercialization.
Open-ended questions were developed and administered to
commercial farmers that show excellence in National Agricultural
and Research Organization (NARO) demonstration projects in
Lango and Buganda sub-regions. This study identified these
farmers from district reports, which constituted secondary
information for this study.
The study was conducted in the districts of Dokolo, Apac, and
Lira in Lango sub-region while in Buganda sub-region, the study
was conducted in the districts of Luwero, Masaka and Wakiso,
respectively. The choice of the districts under study was due to the
fact that the promotion of agricultural commercialization had taken
shape as a result of the availability of market, land and increase in
the number of prominent entrepreneurs engaging in smallholder
agriculture for commercialization. Agricultural commercialization in
Lango is characteristic of annual crops (millet, maize, simsim,
groundnuts, and maize). On the other hand, agricultural
commercialization in Buganda is characteristic of perennial crops
(banana, pineapples, coffee, and sugarcane).
A target population of 1700 was sought for in the study and 313
respondents were considered against the total population of 6320
from which the target was drawn (Uganda Bureau of Statistics
(UBOS), 2018). The sample size of the respondents was from the
selected districts which included Dokolo 44, Apac 55 and Lira 60
from Lango sub-region while from Buganda sub-region Luwero 44,
Wakiso 54 and Masaka. 58 districts were considered and it is from
these districts where the sample size was determined using Krejcie
and Morgan 1970 Table. The varying sample size per district was
based on the premise that the population size of each district varied
and the number of smallholder farmers dealing in commercial
agriculture was also not the same. To identify the right participants,
the researchers visited the office of the District Agricultural Officers,
who availed lists of potential commercial farmers. Using simple
random sampling procedures, sample sizes proportional to the
targeted populations were drawn from each district. Creswell
(2013) believes that simple random sampling eliminates potential
selection bias that is likely to occur in the process of selecting
participants. This procedure of sample selection was used because
the population appeared finite (Amin, 2005). Numerical data
collected through questionnaires were cleaned and validated to
ensure accuracy and consistence. Descriptive, bivariate and
mutivariate data analysis techniques were applied. Chi square
procedure was run to test the hypothesis that financial inclusion
does not affect agricultural commercialization amongst smallholder
in Lango and Buganda sub-region. Regression analysis was
adopted
to
predict
the
level
of
in
commercialization due to changes in financial inclusion. Verbatim
statements from key informants supported quantitative data
analysis.


RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

In both Lango, and Buganda, most of the participants
were male constituting 51.4% and 48.6% were female
respectively. In most part of Uganda, productive resource
like land is majorly owned by men. Therefore, it comes as

Eton et al. 7



Table 1. Correlation test.

Variable list
Output
Agricultural commercialization
(Lango)
Agricultural commercialization
(Buganda)
Financial Inclusion
Correlation
0.314
-0.340

p-value
0.000
0.003

N

**Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed).



no surprise that men dominate commercial agriculture.
Even though women might have access to financial
services, they lack securities to pledge to financial
services providers. The lack of collateral security needed
by formal financial institutions before extending credit
supports Ali et al. (2014). These authors showed that the
high cost of transacting loans affects households from
obtaining credit, of which women are most affected. In
terms of age, most of the participants from Lango were of
35-49 (44.3%) while in Buganda, most of the participants
were of age 18–34 (45.2%). The difference in
participation according to age suggests differences in
land tenure systems. In Lango, land is communally
owned. Therefore, the adults and the old are likely to own
land. In Buganda, land is freehold and highly inheritable,
which has seen young people owning large chunks of
land. Though ownership of land may not imply
participation in commercial agriculture, those with land
have high chances of engaging in commercial agriculture.
In both Lango and Buganda, most of the participants had
attained a university degree constituting 34.4% and
39.7% respectively. In the past, participation in agriculture
was an activity left to the rural poor and uneducated. With
the increasing number of university graduates that are
unemployed, many are turning to commercial agriculture
as a source of employment. The educated are likely to
transfer knowledge, and adopt improved technologies
easily than the less educated. Secondly, the educated
are likely to exploit the increasing opportunities of access
to financial services than the less educated. In both
Lango and Buganda, most of the participants used
mobile money services between 5 to 9 times a week
constituting 38.8% and 50.7% respectively. Though
participants do not use mobile money services for
commercializing agricultural practices, the mere fact that
the service is available enhances commercial agriculture.
This coincides with the findings on financial services
commonly used by commercial farmers. In both Lango
and Buganda, mobile money constituting 66.1% and
80.8% were the most used financial services. Commercial
agriculture is commonly practiced in rural area where
mobile money services are more common than other
financial services. Though village banking might be
accessible in rural areas, they are not attractive to
educated farmers. Food crop constitute agricultural
commercialization in Lango and Buganda, constituting
(66.1%) and 54.8% respectively. In Uganda, there is a
thin line between food crops and cash crops since almost
all food crops are marketable. Secondly, it is cheaper to
cultivate food crops on small farmland than cash crops.


The relationships between financial inclusion and
agricultural commercialization amongst smallholder
farmers in Lango and Buganda sub-regions

The study employed a correlation test to establish the
relationship between financial inclusion and agricultural
farmers.
Correlation coefficient ranges from zero (no relationship)
to one (perfect relationship). Correlation coefficients very
close to zero indicate weak relationships while those very
close to one indicate very strong relationships. Positive
correlation coefficients indicate that the two variables
change in the same direction while negative correlation
coefficients indicate that the two variables change in
opposite directions. The findings are based on a
response rate of 81.8% (256 out of 313) (Table 1).
In Lango, the relationship between financial inclusion
and agricultural commercialization (r =0.314; p-value
=0.000) was weak. The statistics imply government‟s
effort to promote financial inclusion is associated to a
weak change to commercialization. However, the p-value
shows
that
and
are
linearly
related
with
99%
confidence. In Buganda, the relationship between
financial inclusion and agricultural commercialization
amongst small holder famers (r =-0.340; p-value =0.003)
was weak and negative. The statistics imply that an effort
by government to promote financial access is associated
with a reduction in commercialization in Buganda.
However, the p-value shows that financial inclusion and
agricultural commercialization in Buganda are linearly
related with 99% confidence. The findings support The
World Bank (2014), which recommends that governments
should
focus
on
lowering
credit
exposure
to
geographically disadvantaged areas where commercial
farmers have inadequate training in financial products
and services. The report suggests that commercial
farmers are not educated enough on financial products to
take advantage of them. In Uganda, not all commercial
farmers have enough information on agricultural financing

8 J. Econ. Int. Finance



Table 2. Regression coefficients.

Model summary
Lango
R
0.314(a)
-0.340(a)
R square
0.099
0.115
Adjusted R square
0.094
0.103
Std. error of the estimate
6.8653
8.42049

aPredictors: (Constant), Financial Inclusion, bDependent Variable: Agricultural Commercialization



in commercial banks, except in Buganda, where the
practice is gradually penetrating among the educated.
However, the experience seems to disagree with
(Kikulwe et al., 2014) who established that using mobile
money services is associated with increased farm profits,
household income, and input usage. These related
benefits of financial inclusion to agriculture take shape in
an environment that has less barriers to agricultural
production than financial access. Otherwise, this study
shows that a number of factors limit agricultural
commercialization beyond finances. The present findings
disagree with Norton et al. (2014) who draw findings from
developed economics regarding agricultural insurance. In
Uganda, very few commercial farmers have insured their
farms against natural factors. One key informant
observed:

“...our effort to take a living out of agriculture is very
constrained...the loans are available but tagged with
exorbitant
interest
rates...this
coupled
with
the
unpredictable weather may lead to complete losses at
times...”
The
study
observes
that
commercialization in Uganda is growing under tides of
nature and the volatile economy. When the season is
bumper, prices drop drastically making it difficult to repay
agricultural loans. When weather conditions threaten crop
performance, the loss is severe that repaying agricultural
loans is very difficult.


The role of financial inclusion in supporting
agricultural commercialization amongst smallholder
farmer’s in Lango and Buganda sub-regions

To assess the role that financial inclusion plays in
supporting
smallholder farmers in Lango and Buganda sub-regions,
the study adopted regression analysis. Regression is a
mathematical relationship between the independent and
dependent variables. The model uses R Square to assess
the variation in the dependent variable accountable to the
independent variable (Table 2).
Financial inclusion explains only 10% (R Square
=0.099) of the variation of agricultural commercialization
in Lango. In Buganda, financial inclusion explains only
11.5% (R Square =0.115) of the variation of agricultural
commercialization. The statistics imply absence of
significant differences in the effect of financial inclusion
on agricultural commercialization amongst small holder
famers in the two sub-regions. Secondly, the effect of
financial inclusion on agricultural commercialization
amongst small holder farmers is low, which suggests the
interplay of other factors in both regions. It should be
noted that though the effects of financial inclusion appear
to be low in both communities, financial inclusion
increases agricultural commercialization in Lango and
decreases in Buganda. These findings seem to agree
with Rubhara and Mudhara (2019) who established that
subsistence farmers are likely to adopt commercial
agriculture if given financial support. While it is true that
inadequate financial support is one limiting factor to
commercial agriculture amongst small holder farmers, it
is just a microcosm to the many barriers to agriculture
development in Uganda. The findings further support
Prato and Longo (2012) who identified inadequate and
insecure access to natural resources as responsible for
the increasing income inequality and financial exclusion
among rural dwellers. Not to suggest that commercialized
agriculture is an activity of the rural poor, financial
exclusion affects mostly the poor.
The negative
relationship between financial inclusion and agricultural
in
Buganda supports FAOAcademic de Centro-America
(2016) who observed that informal financial services tend
to be costly, lack diversity, and affects borrowers on small
scale. The costs associated with transacting credit tend
to inch on the profits commercial farmers are likely to get.
However, whether informal or formal financial services,
accessing credit in Uganda is still costly, especially
among the low-income earners.


Factors
hindering
the
growth
of
commercialization amongst smallholder farmers in
Lango and Buganda sub-regions

To
assess
the
factors
affecting
commercialization amongst the smallholder farmers, the
study subjected descriptive measures on a set of factors
drawn from the Ugandan environment. The study used
„arithmetic mean‟ to show where participants‟ views
clustered mostly, and „standard deviation‟ to show where

Eton et al. 9



Table 3. Factors affecting agricultural commercialization.

Variable List
Lango, N = 183
Buganda, N = 73
Mean
Std.
Mean
Std.
Expensive equipment
4.5
0.718
4.44
0.957
Weather changes
4.19
0.851
4.41
0.955
Droughts
3.85
1.042
3.84
1.269
Floods
3.9
1.003
3.82
1.358
Pests and diseases
4.45
0.738
4.36
0.903
Inadequate financing for long-term growth
4.27
0.75
4.41
0.879
Limited farmland
3.97
1.141
3.79
1.354
Inadequate technology
4.27
0.755
4.15
0.923
Inability to access capital
4.04
0.997
4.23
0.993
Inability to invest in modern inputs
4.11
0.811
4.11
1.061
Fluctuating prices
4.31
0.918
4.48
0.818
Inefficient marketing institutions
3.73
1.186
3.85
1.232
Poor infrastructure
3.97
1.266
3.81
1.478

Source: Field data (2020).



participants‟ opinions deviated mostly (Table 3). These
scores were computed from a 5-point likert scale.
In Lango, the high mean scores point to expensive
equipment (mean = 4.5; Std. =0.718), pests and diseases
(mean = 4.45; Std. =0.738), and fluctuating prices (mean
= 4.31; Std. =0.918) as key among the limiting factors to
agricultural commercialization. In Buganda, high mean
scores point to fluctuating prices (mean = 4.48; Std.
=0.818), expensive equipment (mean = 4.44; Std.
=0.957), weather changes (mean = 4.41; Std. =0.955),
and inadequate financing for long-term growth (mean =
4.41; Std. =0.878) as key among the limiting factors to
commercialization.
The
factors
limiting
agricultural commercialization in both communities,
based on mean scores are expensive equipment, and
fluctuating prices. While the mean scores do not reveal
unique
patterns
of
concentration
of
opinions,
a
comparison of standard deviations shows fluctuating
prices as the most important factor limiting agricultural
in
both
communities.
In
both
communities, standard deviations indicate that poor
infrastructure is not a worrying problem to agricultural
commercialization. The findings seem to disagree with
IPCC (2012) and Tambi (2018) who argued that climatic
change has the greatest effect on agricultural production.
Climatic
affects
productivity
contextually. For instance, farmers who cultivate in
wetlands are least likely to be affected by climatic
changes since wetlands do not dry completely. Similarly,
farmers in mountainous areas are least likely to be hit by
climatic changes, especially those that are situated on
the windward side of the mountain. The findings in
Buganda region agree with Levine (2005) and Shiferaw
et al. (2015) who relate agricultural productivity to access
to credit. Buganda region is near Uganda‟s capital city,
Kampala, where financial services are easily available.
However, there are isolated pockets of commercial
agriculture in Luwero and Masaka, which are known for
pineapples, and coffee production respectively. Wakiso
for example is a city suburb with very small pockets of
commercial agriculture on limited farmland. Therefore,
access to finance in this region is negatively associated
to agricultural commercialization.


Hypothesis
testing
on
and
agricultural commercialization

The study adopted Chi-Square results under cross
tabulation procedure to test whether financial inclusion
and agricultural commercialization are independent. As a
guide to interpretation, an asymptotic significant value
(Asymp. Sig. <0.05) indicates that the variables are
related while Asympt. Sig. >0.05 indicates that the
variables are independent (Table 4).
In Lango, Asympt. Sig. <0.05, therefore rejecting the
null hypothesis, which indicates that financial inclusion
and
are
related.
In
Buganda, Asympt. Sig. <0.05, which also leads to the
rejection of the null hypothesis, indicating that financial
inclusion and agricultural commercialization are related.
Based on the asymptotic significant values of the cross
tabulation,
and
commercialization are related in both Lango and
Buganda. The study rejected the null hypothesis that
does
not
commercialization amongst smallholder farmers in both
Lango and Buganda sub-regions; and accepted the
alternative hypothesis that financial inclusion affects
agricultural commercialization amongst small holder

10 J. Econ. Int. Finance



Table 4. Chi-Square results.


Lango
Asymp. Sig. (2-sided)
Asymp. Sig. (2-sided)
Pearson Chi-square
0.000
0.000
Likelihood ratio
0.774
1.000
Linear-by-linear association
0.000
0.003
Number of valid cases

The study set HO: = Null hypothesis, and HA: = Alternative hypothesis. HO: Financial inclusion does not affect agricultural
commercialization amongst smallholder farmers in Lango and Buganda sub-regions; HA: Financial inclusion affects agricultural
commercialization amongst smallholder‟s farmers in Lango and Buganda sub-regions.
Source: Field data (2020)



farmers in both Lango and Buganda sub-regions. The
study is likely to obtain the same conclusion from over
95% of the sampled objects. Notwithstanding, directional
measures indicate that financial inclusion positively
affects agricultural commercialization in Lango, and not in
Buganda.


CONCLUSION AND POLICY IMPLICATIONS

Agricultural commercialization is one step forward to
poverty alleviation in a developing country like Uganda
but its success will persistently lean on a set of economic
and natural variables. This study has identified financial
inclusion as one variable that can predict the success of
farmers, though it varies from one region to another. In
Lango, government has a positive effect on financial
inclusion in agricultural commercialization; while in
Buganda, it is a negative factor. In Lango, land is
communal and therefore smallholder farmers need to
access finances to purchase or rent land for commercial
farming. In Buganda, however, land is freehold, which
makes smallholder farmers to inherit chunks of land from
their parents. They need financial assistance to boost
productivity than acquiring land. Nevertheless, these are
relative positions in both Lango and Buganda because
the overall input of financial access to agricultural
commercialization is generally low. Of course, in Lango,
farmers do not have collateral security to pledge before
financial service providers while in Buganda, especially in
Wakiso, land is expensive for commercial farming due to
rapid urbanization. The study has established some
common factors that limit agricultural commercialization
amongst smallholder farmers in both Lango and Buganda
that is expensive equipment and fluctuating prices while
poor infrastructure is no longer a big worry. The existence
of these factors and some shadows in financial access
gave a strong ground to reject the null hypothesis that
access
does
not
commercialization amongst smallholder farmers in both
Lango
and
sub-regions.
We
therefore
recommend that, financial service providers should
continue revising their lending terms downwards to reach
smallholder farmers, many of whom lack collateral
security to pledge for credit. While the government takes
credit for improving infrastructure, government, through
her policy organs like Ministry of Agriculture, should
provide buffer prices against price fluctuations. This study
contributes a unique relationship between financial
inclusion and agricultural commercialization amongst
smallholder farmers by drawing from a plethora of a
comparative analysis. Future researchers should consider
examining how price fluctuation could be handled to
support smallholder farmers to increase productivity.


CONFLICT OF INTERESTS

The authors have not declared any conflict of interests.