This study examined the factors affecting the growth of the urban Churches of the Diocese of
Lweru with special reference to Rubungo Parish in Muleba District. The objectives of the study
were; to determine how the church growth influence Rubungo Parish in D/L, to identify the
growth of the church of Rubungo Parish in D/L and to find out the factors that affect the church
growth of Rubungo Parish in D/L. Both qualitative and quantitative designs using a sample of 50
respondents was adopted. Simple random sampling and purposive sampling techniques were
used to select the respondents and data was collected using well designed structured
questionnaire and interview guide. Findings revealed that 47.1% of the respondents said that
listening and ready to learn from others who have succeeded is the only way how the church
growth can influence Rubungo Parish in the Diocese of Lweru. It was also indicated that 23.5%
of the respondents identified good leadership as the growth of the church of Rubungo Parish in
the Diocese of Lweru. In addition, findings also indicated that 23.5% of the respondents said that
conflicts in Church is a factor that affects the church growth of Rubungo Parish in the Diocese of
Lweru. In conclusion, the findings of the study indicated that listening and ready to learn from
others who have succeeded is the only way how the church growth can influence Rubungo
Parish in the Diocese of Lweru. Good leadership is the growth of the church of Rubungo Parish
in the Diocese of Lweru. In addition, conflicts in Church are a major factor that affects the
church growth of Rubungo Parish in the Diocese of Lweru. The study recommends that the
Rubungo Parish should focus on listening and learning from others who have succeeded in
Church growth as the only way to influence the growth of Rubungo Parish in the Diocese of
Lweru. The study also recommends that there should be good leadership in Rubungo Parish that
can stimulate the growth of the church of Rubungo Parish in the Diocese of Lweru. In addition,
there should be strict mechanisms of conflicts resolution in the Church in a bid to foster church
growth of Rubungo Parish in the Diocese of Lweru.

CHAPTER ONE: INTRODUCTION
1.1.0 Introduction
This research attempts to discuss the factors affecting the growth of the urban churches of the
Diocese of Lweru (D/L) especially to Rubungo Parish. This chapter discussed the following
parts; the Problem and its Setting; the Literature Review; the Research Methodology and
concluding with a chapter summary.
1.1.1 The Background of the Study
Throughout the centuries, the Church has been wining people to Christ by confronted and
controlled message of Christ. Among the people who were converted by the gospel in 1917
through CMS missionaries were people in Muleba area where the Mukama Ntale became a
Christian and gave part of his land for the Church and in 1923, Rubungo Church was built and in
1925, it became a parish under Kagera Diocese.
In 2006 the D/L was born from Kagera Diocese and Rubungo became a Cathedral and since that
year people have been welcomed, baptized, confirmed in this Parish but it seems there is low
growth in participation of Sunday services, fellowship and Church growth while the number
increases in the church book records. Church development projects are still poor and there may
be some reasons or factors affecting the growth of this Parish which the researcher had to
research on and find out the solution towards the challenges.

1.1.2 Statement of the Problem
The Parish of Rubungo Anglican in D/L seems not growing in either spiritual matters or physical
matters. The idea is to get the solution of these challenges towards the church growth. Therefore,
this research intended to get some reasons why this parish is not growing by finding the factors
affecting the growth of this parish comparing with other Anglican parishes in rural areas in the
D/L and providing some solutions on how the Parish of Rubungo can grow from where it is
through collections gathered by the researcher.
1.1.3 Purpose of the Study
The main purpose of this study was to examine the factors affecting the growth of the urban
Churches of the Diocese of Lweru with special reference to Rubungo Parish in Muleba District.
1.1.4 The Specific Objectives of the Study
i.
To determine how the church growth influence Rubungo Parish in D/L.
ii.
To identify the growth of the church of Rubungo Parish in D/L.
iii.
To find out the factors that affect the church growth of Rubungo Parish in D/L.
1.1.5 Research Questions
This research answered the following questions:
i.
How does the church growth influence Rubungo Parish in D/L?
ii.
How can the church of Rubungo Parish identify its growth in the D/L?
iii.
What are the factors that affect the church growth of Rubungo Parish in D/L?

1.1.6 The Scope of the Study
The research was carried out in Rubungo Parish, in the Diocese of Lweru in the Anglican Church
of Tanzania which has two churches settled in Muleba district in North West of Tanzania which
geographically covers an area of approximately 3,518 square kilometers.8
The study specifically focused on exploring the factors affecting the growth of urban Churches.
The study also determined how the church growth influence Rubungo Parish in D/L, identified
the growth of the church of Rubungo Parish in D/L and found out the factors that affect the
church growth of Rubungo Parish in D/L. The study covered the period between January to
March 2023.
1.1.7 Justification of the Study
The study was expected to create knowledge of church growth among the Christians in Rubungo
Parish, in the Diocese of Lweru in the Anglican Church of Tanzania. It was also meant to expose
the factors affecting the church growth in the parish, their challenges, reminding them and giving
an advice on the best way to be used to make church grow in Rubungo Parish. This study
focused on encouraging all the members in this parish to be participants in bringing development
in the parish by supporting themselves, knowing God and spreading the gospel of our Lord Jesus
Christ so that the whole parish grows spiritual and physical growth. Also, study may help in
sharing with church leaders on how they can play their part to bring development to their church
and themselves. This may be through sharing the results of the finding of the study with relevant

_ Cited in en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Muleba District#: ~:text=The%20district%20covers%20area%20of,
kilometres%20(1%2C358%20sq%20mi). in 3rd February 2023.

stakeholder and the community at large through writing, church services, public gatherings
through the ministry of a researcher.
1.1.8 The Significance of the Study
The importance of undertaking this research, first, was to affirm the researcher with a solid
knowledge of understanding the factors affecting the growth of the urban Churches. After being
researched, it was expected to bring the solution towards the factors affecting the Church growth
to the Rubungo Parish in D/L and may help the researcher in his ministry how to overcome these
challenges in the future.
The study may show how the researcher has satisfied the academic requirements for the award of
a Bachelor of Divinity at Uganda Christian University.
The study may help Christians to understand the Challenges facing Church growth of Rubungo
Parish and know how to deal with these challenges.
The study may help the Church minister of Rubungo Parish to realize these challenges stopping
their Churches from growth and know how to solve these challenges and develop their ministry
in Churches.
Lastly, the study may help to answer some questions of people about the factors affecting the
growth of the urban Churches to the Rubungo Parish in the D/L.
1.1.9 The Limitations
The researcher faced some challenges which had to be overcome in order to come up with the
needed information for the study.

i.
Time was not friendly to the respondents because it was the season for cultivation
and many went back in villages for farming. Some because they are business
people were traveling for buying and selling goods, and others were busy in their
shops with costumers.
ii.
The researcher was aware with the challenge of some respondents who were
giving some false information and sometimes hide the information because some
were pretending to be busy with business and works.
iii.
Some questions given to some people were not brought back on time and others
were not brought back at all.
iv.
Sometimes some people were demanding money to give information needed by
the researcher.
1.1.10 Delimitations
In order to succeed in this study, the researcher did the following;
i.
When the time was not friendly to the respondents because of the season for
cultivation, business period and time for transport the researcher found every
opportunity to get the respondents even making an appointment with the
respondent.
ii.
Although the researcher was aware with the challenge of deceiving respondents,
the researcher was ignoring the information after realizing that the information
given is not true but without telling the respondents because some respondents
were not giving the right information and ask, why, how or what, and sometimes

hide the information because some were pretending to be busy with business and
works.
iii.
Because some questions given to different people were not be brought back on
time and others were not even brought back at all. However, the researcher was
being patient with all kind of respondents and found different ways to collect the
information needed.
iv.
Sometimes some people demanded money to give information needed by the
researcher. To such kinds the researcher convinced them that the research is not to
be traded out for money but just for academic purpose. Otherwise, the researcher
mobilized some money from people for transport and other costs needed to
accomplish the research.
1.2.0 Literature Review
The literature was reviewed under the three objectives which are: to determine how the Church
growth influence Rubungo Parish in D/L, to identify the growth of the Church of Rubungo
Parish in D/L and to find out the factors that affect the Church growth of Rubungo Parish in D/L.
1.2.1 How can the Church growth influence Rubungo Parish in D/L
According to Northouse, “Servant leaders emphasize improving the well-being of their
followers, building community, and developing people by modeling Christlike behavior. A
positive attitude coupled with a faithful commitment to serve others is fundamental to this
leadership model. These pastors believe that a ministry candidate grows stronger, healthier, and
more autonomous as they focus on serving others. Like other leadership models, servant leaders
seek to empower their followers by giving them the freedom to make decisions and be selfsufficient. However, the overarching goal for this leadership model is to create healthy Church
environs that can enhance follower and organizational performance, stimulate growth, and make
a significant impact on the communities and cities in proximity to the Church.”9
On the meaning of Church Samuel Kunhiyop says, “The concept of the Church as a community
also resonates with Africans because of the scope of this community. It includes all believers
worldwide and each local community (Church) and is also connected to the past (believer who
have died) and to the future (those who have yet to be born spiritually). This way of seeing the
Church acknowledges the role of our spiritual ancestors. These ancestors are the dead (Hebrew
and Christian) who are interested in our lives and exert influence over them, serving as examples
and encouragement for us. Hebrews 12:1 talks of them when it speaks of the “witnesses that
surround us”, referring to the heroes of the faith whose names are listed in Hebrews 11)).”10 As
Dever Mark says, “church does not simply refer to an organizational unit of any particular
religion....but is a thoroughly Christian word... the church is primarily a body of people who
profess and give evidence that they have been saved by God’s grace alone, for his glory alone,
through faith alone, in Christ alone.”11

_ Northouse, Peter G. (2016). Leadership: Theory and Practice. 7th ed. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE. Pg. 225-

Hazlitt William adds, “The true church is an assembly or congregation depending on that which
does not appear, nor may be comprehended in mind, namely, God’s Word; what that says, they
believe without addition, giving God the honor.”12
Also, Tows says, “the term “Church Growth” is associated with evangelism and/or missionary
enterprises that imply outreach to the lost and their incorporation into a church, hence causing
local church growth”13 (Towns, 1986, 63).
According to C. Peter Wagner, Church Growth is “all that is involved in bringing men and
women who do not have a personal relationship with Jesus Christ into fellowship with Him and
into responsible Church membership”14 (Wagner, 1972, p. 12).
1.2.2 Involvement of the growth to the Church of Rubungo Parish in D/L
The True Preaching of the Word of God
Berkhof states that “the true preaching of the word is the great means for maintaining the Church
and for enabling her to be the mother of the faithful.”15 Also Mark Dever adds this; “Spiritual
growth is a solidly biblical concept. It isn’t only Americans who are concerned about growth; it
isn’t just something about our national culture. It is an idea that’s in the Bible and from as far
back as creation itself, ... A church in which there is expositional preaching will be a church that

_ Hazlitt William, (2009), Martin Luther’s Table talk; Luther’s comments on life, the Church and the Bible:
Christian Focus Publications, Geanies House, Scotland. Pg. 259
_ Town, Elmer L. (March 1986). The Relationship of Church Growth and Systematic Theology, Journal of
the Evangelical Society, 29(1). Pg. 63
_ Wagner, C. Peter. (1971). Strategies for Church Growth: Tools for Effective Mission and Evangelism.
Ventura, CA: Regal Books. Pg. 12
_ Berkhof Louis, (1949), Systematic Theology: The Banner of Truth Trust; Grand Rapids, Michigan. Pg. 577

encourages Christian growth. God’s World is what we need if we are to grow. The culture around
us won’t tell us what we most need.”16
Furthermore, in support of spirituality as the first priority, Carlos G. Martin lists some realistic
principles of church growth: (1) Spiritual renewal precedes and accompanies Church growth; (2)
a correct theology precedes true growth; (3) growth occurs when emphasis is placed upon
presence, proclamation and persuasion evangelism; (4) Church growth happens when spiritual
gifts are identified and employed through significant ministries; and (5) Church growth is
directly proportional to the number of members involved in witnessing17 (Martin, 1995, p. 20).
Prayers
According to Roger’s book says “The early church learnt to depend upon God for its very
survival through united prayer (acts 4:24-31). When their leader, Peter, was put in prison he was
miraculously delivered in answer to the united prayers of the church (Acts12:5-11). Prayer is a
mighty weapon and the church learns to use it against all its enemies. Prayer expresses the fact
that we are completely dependent upon God for all our needs. Jesus often prayed to his father
and taught his follower to do the same. He told us to do so all times (Luke 18:1), privately
(Matthew 6:6), and with others (Matthew 18:19-20). He was emphasized that faith in God’s
ability to answer prayer is essential if we want to receive answers from him (Matthew 21: 21-

_ Dever Mark, (2000), Nine Marks of a Healthy Church (3rd edition): Published by Crossway, Wheaton,
Illinois Pg. 216
_ Martin, Carlos G. (1995). Principles and Procedures of Adventist Church Growth. Class notes for MSSN
600, Adventist International Institute of Advanced Studies, Silang, Cavite, Philippines. Pg. 20

22). Prayer must always be made in the name of Christ (John 14:13), and our requests must be in
accordance with God’s revealed will (1 John 5:14).”18
Samuel Kunhiyop in his book supports the “Prayer is an important aspect of the work of the
community of God. It includes confession of sins (Ps 32:5; Ezra 10:1; 1 John 1:9), supplication
(Ps 30:8; Eph 6:18; Ph 4:6), adoration and thanks giving (Eph 5:19-20) and intercession (Jas
5:16). Intercession is prayer offered by a believer on behalf of someone else. We can pray
effectively for others because the church is a priesthood of believers (Rev 5:10). The New
Testament contains many examples of intercessory prayers (Rom 15:5-6; 13; 2 Cor 13:7; Eph
3:16-19; 6:18; 1 Thes. 3:10-13; 5:23; 2 Thes. 2:17; 3:5-6; Heb 13:21.”19
Evangelism
As Millard says “The topic emphasized in both accounts of Jesus’s last words to these disciples is
evangelism. In Matthew 28:19 he instructs them, “Therefore go and make disciples of all
nations.” In Acts 1:8 he says, “But you will receive power when the Holy Spirit comes on you;
and you will my witnesses in Jerusalem, and in all Judea and Samaria, and to the ends of the
earth,” This was the final point Jesus made to his disciples. It appears that he regarded
evangelism as the very reason for their being. The call to evangelize is a command. Having
accepted Jesus as Load, The Disciples had brought themselves under his rule and were obligated
to do whatever he asked.”20

_ Weil Roger, Pg. 358
_ Kunhiyop Waje Samuel, (2012), African Christian Theology: WordAlive Publishers, Nairobi, Kenya Pg. 166
_ Erickson J. Millard, (1983), Christian Theology; Third Edition: Published Baker, Grand Rapids, Michigan.
Pg. 972

Samuel Kunhiyop adds “The Church is commanded to teach out to win people to Christ. Jesus
said.... (Matt 28:18-20; see also Acts I:8). Jesus gave this command not only to pastors,
missionaries and evangelists but to all his disciples, who are all to be witness to Christ’s offer of
salvation to eternal life. The Lausanne Covenant of 1974 declared, “We affirm that Christ sends
his redeemed people into the world as the Father sent him, and that this calls for a similar deep
and costly penetration of the world. We need to break out of our ecclesiastical ghettos and
permeate non- Christian society.”54 The Lausanne Manila Manifesto added, “Every Christian
congregation is a local expression of the Body of Christ and has same responsibilities for the
spread of the gospel”55.”21
Also, Thom Rainer said that “true church growth takes place when ‘Great Commission’ disciples
are added and are evidenced by responsible church membership”22 (Rainer, 1993, p. 21)
Willingness to serve and Adaptability
Millard states that, “Jesus stated that his purpose in coming was not to be served, but to serve
(Matt. 20:28). In becoming incarnate he took upon himself the form of a servant (Phil. 2:7).
“And being found in appearance as a man, he humbled himself and become obedient to death –
even on a cross!” (v.8). the church must display a similar willingness to serve. It has been placed
in the world to serve lord and the world, not to be exalted and have its own needs and desires

_ Kunhiyop Pg. 164
_ Rainer, Thom S. (1993). The Book of Church Growth: History, Theology, and Principles. Broadman Press:
Nashville. Pg. 21

satisfied. Although the church may attain great size, wealth, and prestige that is not its
purpose.”23
Adaptability: He continues saying “The church must also be versatile and flexible in adjusting its
methods and procedures to the changing situations of the world in which it finds it. It must go
where needy persons are found, even if that means a geographical or cultural change. It must not
cling to all its old ways. As the world to which it is trying to minister changes, the Church will
have to adapt its ministry accordingly, but without altering its basic direction.”24.

Serving Gifts
According to Eric Wright, he said “Serving gifts demonstrate a propensity to serve humbly and
happily. The endow believers with the spiritual to demonstrate Christian love in practical ways.
Helpfulness is the general spiritual gift of those who are especially sensitive to, and quick to
reach out to meet practical needs, whatever they may be. It involves the talent or training to do
practical things like painting, finance, cooking – or a host of other things. It may be just as surely
manifest in a general spirit of humble and happy helpfulness. Those with the gift of hospitality
generously use their home and possessions to provide a warm atmosphere of openness and
acceptance conducive to making strangers, new Christians, immigrants in need all kinds of
people - feel at home.

_ Ibid, Pg. 987

Giving is that Sprit-produced ability to view finances and material resources as a steward ship –
a trust from god to be used wisely, generously, cheerfully and systematically in the furtherance of
Gods purposes on an individual, local or world-wide scale. The gift of mercy is that sprit –
produced the compassion for those in misery or distress that overflows in an abundance of
cheerful and practical help for those who are poor sick, lonely bereft or unfortunate. Those with
this gift manifest abundant empathy.
Administration or leadership is a sprit – produced ability to serve the lord and his people by
taking a vision of what should be breaking it down in to goals and objectives, evaluating present
conditions, planning what to do motivating others to take part, and organizing and directing the
resultant work until the plan is brought to completion.
Those with the gift of faith, mountain-moving faith, feel a deep dissatisfaction with present
conditions. Glimpse a vision of what God can do, face seemingly insurmountable obstacles and
yet perceive that God will overcome the impossible.
The gift of discernment is that spiritual ability to discriminate between truth and error in
teaching, between good and evil in conduct and between genuine and hypocritical expressions of
the Christian faith. It sometimes involves recognizing demonic influence in individuals or
groups.”25
The Teaching
Again, Wright says “Specifically, Christian teaching aims at change, the transformation of
redeemed sinners from the inside out. Teaching will be complete only when every believer is

_ Wright Eric, (1994), Church – No Spectator Sport: Evangelical Press, Darlington, England Pg. 436-437

conformed to the image of Christ. Good teachers help us to achieve that goal by targeting change
in four in four areas...”26
Happiness and Love
According to Gebre Worancha “(1) There must be a climate of happiness and loving God and
one another in the church; (2) the church must have a Bible-centered atmosphere that
demonstrates by its regular and continuous Bible studies; (3) the members of the church must be
enthusiastic and become the cause for maintaining enthusiasm; (4) the church must be
evangelistic and zealous to win lost souls for Christ; (5) a growing church should be able to
claim backslidden members; (6) a growing church should have great faith to practice its vision;
(6) a growing church should be a praying church that prays for its spiritual growth and for God’s
work throughout the world; and (8) a growing church believes in the Holy Scripture —
“Scripture and Scripture alone”—and do and live what it says (Mt 7:21; Lu 6:46; 11:28; Rom
2:13; 1Jo 3:7 Jam 1:22).”27
1.2.3 Factors Affecting the Growth of the Urban Churches of D/L in Rubungo Parish
No proper leadership and Discipline which lead to sin
Roger said “Where there is no proper leadership and discipline, sin and folly will, is
uncontrolled, destroy any Church. We see that when the church in Corinth was in danger of

_ Ibid, Pg. 268
_ Worancha, Gebre. (2009). I Must Preach This Gospel: God’s Mission and Accountability of His Church in
This End-Time AAMM, Vol. 5. Everlasting Gospel Publishing Association: Seoul, Korea. Pg. 27

being destroyed by unruly internal divisions, pride and immorality, Paul had to exercise strong
and severe discipline in order to restore harmony and save it from destroying itself.”28
Wright Eric adds “Spiritual death is both connected with physical death and distinguished from
it. It is the separation of the entire person from God, as a perfectly holy being, cannot look upon
sin or tolerate its presence. Thus, sin is a barrier to the relationship between God and humans,
bringing them under God’s judgment and connection.”29
Also, Worancha adds, “the following abridgments are Church growth affecting factors:
Ignorance, carnal mindedness, prayerlessness, lack of Bible study, lack of unity, lack of finance,
leadership problems, lack of strategy for evangelism, lack of the power of the Holy Spirit, lack of
commitment, lack of good management & transparency, sin in the church, people-blindness,
theological deviation, arrested spiritual development (materialism, nominalism, tribalism, selfcenteredness), and the biggest of all, in Africa particular, lack of nurturing to the newly
baptized”30 (Worancha, 2009, pp. 190-252).
Conflict
O. C. Isom II states, “The most common disease that infects the Church today is conflict.... this
disease called “conflict” is caused by the transferring of words, such as, “We’ve never done it
that way before, so why is the pastor going this way?” and other negative and destructive

_ Weil Roger, (2007), Foundations of the Christian Faith; Grace Publications Trust, London Pg. 359-360
_ Wright Eric, Pg. 559
_ Worancha, 2009, Pg. 190-252.

words...this sinful spirit is an evil disease that has spread and wiped away so much unity in
churches in the Body of Christ. God looks at the Church as a body.”31
Lack of Love
Isom adds “The reason why some people are leaving Churches today is because they feel they
are not being spiritual nourished, and they are tired of being in a Church where there is only
chaos and no love”32
The Absence of Church Discipline
Isom says “the declining Church discipline is perhaps the most visible failure of the
contemporary Church. No longer concerned with maintaining purity of confession or lifestyle,
the contemporary Church sees itself as a voluntary association of autonomous members, with
minimal moral accountability to God, much less to each other.”33
1.3.0 Research Methodology
This section presents the methodology which was employed during the study. It looks at research
design and approach, the population, sample and sampling procedures, data collection methods,
data collection instruments, data collection procedures, data analysis techniques and how
instruments were validated.

_ Ibid Pg. 216
_ Ibid Pg 216

1.3.1 Research Design
Research design is the framework that has been created for researcher’s questions to seek
answers. It is an arrangement of collecting and analyzing data in relevance to research economy
in procedure. In this study, the researcher used qualitative and quantitative material which shows
in detail the description of interviewing people and finding the information.
This design has found the factors affecting the growth of the urban churches of the D/L
especially to Rubungo Parish in Muleba District and it has written the information that is why the
researcher used also the qualitative method collecting and analyzing data.
1.3.2 Population of the Study
The study population as an entire group a researcher wants to study. The researcher gathered the
information from members of Rubungo Parish in D/L. The study considered the clergy,
evangelists, church elders, youth leaders, Mother Union leaders, and Sunday school leaders as
well as choir leaders.
1.3.3 Sampling Methods/Techniques
Sampling is the way of selecting people to participate in the study and the sample size refers to
the act of choosing the small group of participants who actually act in the investigation. Because
of the large population in Rubungo Parish, the researcher decided to use simple random sampling
and purposive sampling techniques. Simple random sampling method was selected for the
purpose of saving time and getting what was intended. Purpose sampling technique was used on
key persons like the clergy, evangelists, church elders, mothers’ union leaders and youth leader.
Purpose sampling technique was used since it gives firsthand information.

1.3.4 Sample Size
The researcher targeted a sample of 50 respondents from Rubungo Parish.
1.3.5.0 Data Collection Methods
Data collection is “the way of collecting the information which is then used by a researcher to
achieve an accurate picture for the research project.”34 The researcher used both primary and
secondary information in carrying out the study.
1.3.5.1 The Primary Data
Concerning the primary sources, data was collected through direct contact with the respondents,
personal interviews and through questionnaires on factors affecting the urban churches of the
D/L especially to Rubungo Parish in Muleba.
1.3.5.2 The Secondary Data
The secondary sources were used from the already available data collected and analyzed by other
researchers. The researcher used published data available in books, journals, newspapers, reports
and other resources like the internet about the topic of the study.
1.3.6.0 Data Collections Instruments
1.3.6.1 Questionnaires
This is where the researcher used unstructured (open-ended) questions which allowed the
respondent to answer in his/her own words even if their answers found were quite unexpected.
The researcher chose to use this because it was easy to get answers from respondent.

_ Personal Research notes in the third year, 1st Semester (2015), Munguishi Bible College, Tanzania.

1.3.6.2 Interview Guide
In this case the researcher had his personal interviews where he collected the information by
asking questions to the individuals in face-to-face meetings and also used mobile
communications interviews. This was used when it was impossible to conduct personally with
the respondent and depended with whom the researcher expects to ask.
1.3.7 Data Collection Procedures
The researcher asked for permission letter for conducting research from relevant authorities of
UCU-Mukono. The letters helped the researcher to carry out his research without hesitation and
was able to make appointments with different offices, churches leaders and individuals. The
researcher developed a self-administered questionnaire to help him to collect data.
1.3.8 Analysis Techniques
The researcher analyzed the data in statistical technique. The researcher employed analytical
techniques in organizing collected information in a nutshell and manageable proportions easy to
interpret and presentable result manner. The researcher was clearly able to cross check relevant
and appropriate form, data, editing and modifying them into relation to the study. The researcher
tabulated the data through table so as to get frequency percentage for presentable information.
After that, the findings were then documented for submission to the University as a requirement
for the award of a Bachelor of Divinity.
The researcher was sure that all information that he had received or given by the respondents was
confidential. This means that the information was not given or published to everyone but only for

the purpose of helping the D/L purposely Rubungo Parish to come out with the solution from the
challenges facing the church growth.
1.3.9 Validation of Research Instrument
The research techniques were valid to the researcher because it led the researcher to obtain
credible, correct and relevant information pertaining.
Qualitative approach was valid to the study because it was likely to be used in order to obtain
precise information like emotional and feelings, thoughts, and metaphors on factors affecting the
growth in the urban churches in D/L to Rubungo Parish-Muleba.
Quantitative approach was helpful in correcting numerical information appropriate to the study
because it focused in analyzing figures related to factors affecting the growth in the urban
churches especially in Rubungo Parish-Muleba.

CHAPTER TWO: HOW THE CHURCH GROWTH INFLUENCE RUBUNGO PARISH
IN THE DIOCESE OF LWERU
2.0 Introduction
This chapter deals with presentation of research findings, analysis and interpretation of How the
Church growth influence Rubungo Parish in the Diocese of Lweru. The chapter presents
background information of the respondents, followed by presentation of study objective by the
researcher through use of questionnaires and interviews, presentation of data in table forms, and
computation of the response rate.
2.1 Response Rate
The study targeted a sample of 50 respondents and all the questionnaires were issued. However,
only 34 questionnaires were returned as fully answered and complete. This denotes a percentage
response rate of 68%.
Table 2.1: Response rate

Number of respondents Percentage rate
Total number of questionnaires issued
100%
Actual number of Questionnaires returned fully
answered
68%
Questionnaires not returned and fully answered
32%
From table 2.1 above, out of the 50 questionnaires administered, only 34 were returned as fully
answered, giving a response rate of 68%. The study believes it was a good representation for the
study since more than half of the respondents were able to provide the necessary information for
the study.

2.2 Background Information of Respondents
Background data was collected regarding age, sex, and occupation and education level. The table
below gives the details indicating the descriptive statistics for the different background
information of the respondents.
Table 2.2: Background Information of respondents

Information
Category
Age
18-35 years
35.3
36-45 years
17.6
46 years and above
47.1
Total
Sex
Male
41.2
Female
58.8
Total
Occupation
Priest
2.9
Laity
5.9
Evangelist
5.9
Mother’s Union leader
5.9
Youth
44.1
Church elder
35.3
Total
Education level
None
20.6
Primary
47.1
Secondary
14.7
Tertiary
11.7
University
5.9
Total

The above table 2.2 indicates that majority of the respondents 47.1% were 46 years and above,
35.3% were within the age bracket of 18-35 years while only 17.6% were in the age bracket of
36-45 years. This implies that majority of the respondents were 46 years and above, meaning that
the respondents were mature enough to avail the necessary information in relation to the factors
affecting the growth of the urban Churches in the Diocese of Lweru at Rubungo Parish.
From table 2.2 above, majority of the respondents 58.8% were female and 41.2% were male.
This implies that females were more than males. This was attributed to the fact that women tend
to be more available than men since some men have a lot of engagements due to their tight work
schedule.
Table 2.2 reveals that majority of the respondents 44.1% were youth, followed by Church
elder 35.3%, 5.9% were Mother’s Union leaders, 5.9% were Evangelist, 5.9% were Laity
whereas only 2.9% were Priests. This implies that most respondents were youth and church
elder who were more knowledgeable and in better position to provide the needed information on
the factors affecting the growth of the urban Churches in the Diocese of Lweru at Rubungo
Parish.
The above table 2.2 also shows that majority of the respondents 47.1% attained primary
education, 20.6% did not attain any level of education, 14.7% attained secondary education,
11.7% attained tertiary education while only 5.9% attained University education. This implies
that most of the respondents attained primary education while only few attained University
education. This means that most of the respondents were able to respond to the questions
sufficiently since they had attained some level of education and therefore, were in better position

to avail the necessary information for the study regarding the factors affecting the growth of the
urban Churches in the Diocese of Lweru, Rubungo Parish.
2.3 Findings on how the Church growth influence Rubungo Parish in the Diocese of Lweru.
The first objective of the study was to determine how the Church growth influence Rubungo
Parish in the Diocese of Lweru. The respondents were requested to respond to a number of
questions regarding how the Church growth influence Rubungo Parish in D/L in the Diocese of
Lweru. The responses on the questions are summarized in Table 2.3 below;
Table 2.3: How the Church growth influence Rubungo Parish in the Diocese of Lweru
Listening and ready to learn from others who have
succeeded
47.1
Proper management of the Church resources
41.1
Provide opportunities to serve
11.8
Total
2.3.2 Analysis of the findings
From table 2.3 above, majority of the respondents 47.1% said that listening and ready to learn
from others who have succeeded is the only way how the church growth can influence Rubungo
Parish in the Diocese of Lweru, 41.1% of the respondents said that proper management of church

resources is the only way how the Church growth can influence Rubungo Parish in the Diocese
of Lweru and 11.8% of the respondents said that the Church needs to provide different
opportunities to serve and that could be the best way on how the Church growth can influence
Rubungo Parish in the Diocese of Lweru.
2.3.3 Interpretation of the Findings
This implies that listening and ready to learn from others who have succeeded is the only way
how the Church growth can influence Rubungo Parish in the Diocese of Lweru since majority of
the respondents gave the same answer. The above findings show some degree of agreement with
Samuel Kunhiyop who stated that the concept of the Church as a community also resonates with
Africans because of the scope of this community. It includes all believers worldwide and each
local community (Church) and is also connected to the past (believer who have died) and to the
future (those who have yet to be born spiritually). This way of seeing the Church acknowledges
the role of our spiritual ancestors. These ancestors are the dead (Hebrew and Christian) who are
interested in our lives and exert influence over them, serving as examples and encouragement for
us. Hebrews 12:1 talks of them when it speaks of the “witnesses that surround us”, referring to
the heroes of the faith whose names are listed in Hebrews 11)).”35 As Dever Mark says, “Church
does not simply refer to an organizational unit of any particular religion....but is a thoroughly
Christian word... the Church is primarily a body of people who profess and give evidence that

they have been saved by God’s grace alone, for his glory alone, through faith alone, in Christ
alone.”36

CHAPTER THREE: IDENTIFICATION OF THE GROWTH OF THE CHURCH OF
RUBUNGO PARISH IN THE DIOCESE OF LWERU
3.0 Introduction
The second objective of the study was to identify the growth of the Church of Rubungo Parish in
the Diocese of Lweru. The respondents were requested to respond to a question regarding the
identification of the growth of the Church of Rubungo Parish in the Diocese of Lweru.
3.1 The findings on Identification of the growth of the Church of Rubungo Parish in the
The responses on the question are summarized in Table 3.4 below;
Table 3.4: Identification of the growth of the Church of Rubungo Parish in the D/ L
Good leadership
23.5
Strong faith for the Church
11.8
Adoration with decoration, full instruments, well conducted
service and organized youth choir
2.9
Good management of people with physical disabilities
8.8
Increasing number of believers in Church
14.7
Time management
5.9
The unity among Church leaders and congregation
17.7
Nurturing children, youth and women
11.8
Good place for worship
2.9

Total
3.2 The Analysis of the Findings
Table 3.4 revealed that majority of the respondents 23.5% identified good leadership as the
growth of the Church of Rubungo Parish in the Diocese of Lweru, 17.7% identified the unity
among church leaders and congregation as the growth of the Church of Rubungo Parish in the
Diocese of Lweru, 14.7% identified the increasing number of believers in Church as the growth
of the Church of Rubungo Parish in the Diocese of Lweru, 11.8% identified the strong faith for
the Church as the growth of the Church of Rubungo Parish in the Diocese of Lweru, 11.8%
identified nurturing children, youth and women as the growth of the Church of Rubungo Parish
in the Diocese of Lweru, 8.8% identified good management of people with physical disabilities
as the growth of the Church of Rubungo Parish in the Diocese of Lweru, 5.9% identified time
management as the growth of the Church of Rubungo Parish in the Diocese of Lweru whereas
only 2.9% identified adoration with decoration, full instruments, well conducted service and
organized youth choir as the growth of the Church of Rubungo Parish in the Diocese of Lweru
and 2.9% identified good place for worship as the growth of the Church of Rubungo Parish in the
Diocese of Lweru.
3.3 The Interpretation of the Findings
This implies that good leadership was identified as the major aspect of the growth of the Church
of Rubungo Parish in the Diocese of Lweru. This has enhanced the growth of the Church since
every member learns from their leaders in the Church of Rubungo Parish. The above findings are

in line with Gebre Worancha who stated that; (1) There must be a climate of happiness and
loving God and one another in the Church; (2) the Church must have a Bible-centered
atmosphere that demonstrates by its regular and continuous Bible studies; (3) the members of the
Church must be enthusiastic and become the cause for maintaining enthusiasm; (4) the Church
must be evangelistic and zealous to win lost souls for Christ; (5) a growing Church should be
able to claim backslidden members; (6) a growing Church should have great faith to practice its
vision; (6) a growing Church should be a praying Church that prays for its spiritual growth and
for God’s work throughout the world; and (8) a growing Church believes in the Holy Scripture —
“Scripture and Scripture alone”—and do and live what it says (Mt 7:21; Lu 6:46; 11:28; Rom
2:13; 1Jo 3:7 Jam 1:22).”37 The above findings are also in line with Millard who states that,
“Jesus stated that his purpose in coming was not to be served, but to serve (Matt. 20:28). In
becoming incarnate he took upon himself the form of a servant (Phil. 2:7). “And being found in
appearance as a man, he humbled himself and become obedient to death – even on a cross!”
(v.8). the Church must display a similar willingness to serve. It has been placed in the world to
serve Lord and the world, not to be exalted and have its own needs and desires satisfied.
Although the Church may attain great size, wealth, and prestige that is not its purpose.”38 To
further support the above findings, some of the respondents interviewed had this to say;
“Increase of Church Income can be seen as a sign of Church growth since the Church
have enough money to run its programs and activities like paying the salaries of
ministers on time, constructing the Church building and repairing furniture”.

_ Gebre Worancha AAMM, Vol. 5,

“Cooperative in the Church is the key aspect in growth of the Church. When there is
cooperation in Rubungo Parish there is Church growth.”

CHAPTER FOUR: THE FACTORS THAT AFFECT THE CHURCH GROWTH OF
RUBUNGO PARISH IN THE DIOCESE OF LWERU
4.0 Introduction
The third objective of the study was to find out the factors that affect the church growth of
Rubungo Parish in the Diocese of Lweru. The respondents were requested to respond to a
question regarding the factors that affect the Church growth of Rubungo Parish in the Diocese of
Lweru.
4.1 The Findings on Factors that affect the Church growth of Rubungo Parish in the
The responses on the question are summarized in Table 4.5 below;
Table 4.5: Factors that affect the Church growth of Rubungo Parish in the Diocese of
Lweru
The erosion of morals
5.9
Lack of evangelism, new teachings and encouragement
5.9
Poverty and lack of basic needs among Church members
20.6
Unemployment
14.7
Diseases like Covid 19 caused economy to go down due to
restrictions
2.9
Poor Church leadership
8.9
Rise of other denominations in Muleba town
8.9
Conflicts in Church
23.5
Time management
2.9
Not having the long-term plan and short-term plan
2.9
Unmature in Faith
2.9

Total
4.2 The Analysis of the findings
Table 4.5 indicates that 23.5% representing majority of the respondents said that conflicts in
Church is a factor that affects the Church growth of Rubungo Parish in the Diocese of Lweru,
20.6% said that poverty and lack of basic needs among Church members is a factor affecting the
church growth of Rubungo Parish in the Diocese of Lweru, 14.7% said that unemployment is a
factor affecting the church growth of Rubungo Parish in the Diocese of Lweru, 8.9% said that
poor Church leadership is a factor affecting the Church growth of Rubungo Parish in the Diocese
of Lweru, 8.9% said that rise of other denominations in Muleba town is a factor affecting the
church growth of Rubungo Parish in the Diocese of Lweru, 5.9% said that the erosion of morals
is a factor affecting the Church growth of Rubungo Parish in the Diocese of Lweru, 5.9% said
that lack of evangelism, new teachings and encouragement is a factor affecting the Church
growth of Rubungo Parish in the Diocese of Lweru, while only 2.9% of the respondents said that
diseases like Covid 19 caused economy to go down due to restrictions and this was a factor
affecting the Church growth of Rubungo Parish in the Diocese of Lweru, 2.9% said that time
management is the factor affecting the Church growth of Rubungo Parish in the Diocese of
Lweru, 2.9% said that not having the long-term plan and short-term plan is a factor affecting the
Church growth of Rubungo Parish in the Diocese of Lweru and 2.9% of the respodents said that
unmature in faith is a factor affecting the Church growth of Rubungo Parish in the Diocese of
Lweru.

4.3 The Interpretation of the Findings
This implies that conflicts in Church is a major factor that affects the Church growth of Rubungo
Parish in the Diocese of Lweru since majority of the respondents gave same answer. This may
arise in situations where the Church leader disagrees with fellow leaders, one group of choirs
disagree with another group up to the matter of not sharing the music instruments in the service
which cause some Church members not feel comfortable attending in Rubungo Church because
some come to worship and satisfy through singing and praising. The above findings are in line
with O. C. Isom II who states that “The most common disease that infects the Church today is
conflict.... this disease called “conflict” is caused by the transferring of words, such as, “We’ve
never done it that way before, so why is the pastor going this way?” and other negative and
destructive words...this sinful spirit is an evil disease that has spread and wiped away so much
unity in churches in the Body of Christ. God looks at the Church as a body.”39 The above
findings are also in line with Roger who said that “Where there is no proper leadership and
discipline, sin and folly will, is uncontrolled, destroy any Church. We see that when the church in
Corinth was in danger of being destroyed by unruly internal divisions, pride and immorality, Paul
had to exercise strong and severe discipline in order to restore harmony and save it from
destroying itself.”40 Wright Eric also adds that “Spiritual death is both connected with physical
death and distinguished from it. It is the separation of the entire person from God, as a perfectly
holy being, cannot look upon sin or tolerate its presence. Thus, sin is a barrier to the relationship

_ Weil Roger, (2007), Foundations of the Christian Faith; Grace Publications Trust, London Pg. 359-360

between God and humans, bringing them under God’s judgment and connection.”41 The above
findings are also in agreement with Isom who stated that “the declining church discipline is
perhaps the most visible failure of the contemporary church. No longer concerned with
maintaining purity of confession or lifestyle, the contemporary Church sees itself as a voluntary
association of autonomous members, with minimal moral accountability to God, much less to
each other.”42 To also support those above findings, some of the respondents interviewed said the
following;
“A tendency of taking children in other region for schools which makes the church to
remain with few people where by those who were baptized and get confirmation in
Rubungo Parish go to other region to study from there hence not come back which reduce
the attendance of believers in Sunday and in fellowship”.
“Transferring government workers who are church members that are employed in the
government to go in another workplace from Rubungo Parish affects its growth. When
there is transfer of people who have been supporting the Church financially, the Church
income goes down and makes even lacking monthly salary for Church ministers in
Rubungo Parish”.

_ Wright Eric, Pg. 559
_ Ibid Pg 216

CHAPTER FIVE: THEOLOGICAL REFLECTION
5.0 Introduction
This chapter presents theological reflection towards the factors that affecting the growth of urban
churches by looking on what is the Church growth, the factors making the church grow and the
factors that affect the Church from growing and what can be done to make the ministers focus on
the Bible solutions to grow the Church.
5.1.0 The meaning of the Church growth
According to the Bible, the word Church has various meanings. Firstly, it refers to a house set
apart for public worship and secondly, it refers to the whole body of Christians. It may also refer
to a particular denomination of Christians, as well as any group with a common creed, which
may not necessarily be Christians. The word Church is Lord in which it was designated the place
the apostles and evangelists gathered believers together for worship and mutual support. In the
New Testament, it means both the entire body of believers worldwide (Matthew 16:18), and a
group of believers in a particular area (Acts 5:11). It also refers to the congregation that meets in
a particular house (Romans 16:5), and the general assembly of Christians in heaven (Hebrews
2:12; 12:23). Nevertheless, most of the meanings involve and refer to the Church as a body or
group of believers; their differences are only in the location, size or period of existence.
5.1.1 The Church Growth
According to Old Testament the Church Growth is increasing of number of God’s people and
knowing God and his decreases and worshiping him. The symptom of church growth is blessings
in people’s life. When they followed God’s laws fully, the blessings followed them, but when

there were curses it means God’s people didn’t follow God and so curse came as God’s
punishment. Exodus 1:7 God’s people increased in number
In the New Testament the Church growth is the increasing number of believers and
understanding of Christ in their hearts and continuing in the word of God filled with the Holy
Spirit and excessing the gifts of the Holy Spirit. The book of Acts is the book which shows how
the Church grown and the factors affected the growth of the Church.
5.2.0 Identification of the growth of the Church of Rubungo Parish in the Diocese of Lweru
5.2.1 Preaching of the Word
In Acts 2:41; 11:24 when the gospel was proclaimed people were converted and stated increasing
and multiplied in number through the gospel. An effective pastor in an urban Church must be
mission-oriented developing stronger community outreach programs. This can help the pastor to
better understand the needs of the people he/she is leading (Matthew 28:19-20; Acts 1:8). For
example, mission orientations on caring for the orphans and widows in vulnerable urban
communities like Jesus did and highly emphasized by James (James 1:26-27). As James A.
Scherer, adds that “these clarify the goodness of having dependence or independence, love or
belongingness, self-esteem and self-actualization.”43 It is making sure that every participant in
the Church is enjoying the benefits of being part and parcel of each other. Also, Beth says, “the
overall mission of the Church is to win souls for Christ through evangelism strategies. However,
to participate in the mission of God is to announce the good news of the kingdom.”44 This is the

_ James A. Scherer, Stephen B. Bevans. (1994). New Directions in Missions and Evangelism 2: Theological
Foundations. Page 8.
_ Beth Snodderly and A. Scott Moreau. (2011). Evangelical and Frontier Mission: Perspective on the Global

mission of being compassionate as well as doing the work of justice which can win the souls of
many suffering Christians in urban settings. The most important role of leaders and pastors on
the same mission is to be role models in nurturing others those they seek to influence. This can
help Christians to grow by means of example and exhortation. This may be seen by viewing 1
Peter 5:3, I Timothy 4:11-12, and Titus 2:7 consecutively.
5.2.2 The fellowship of believers
In Acts 2:42-47; 4:32, 12:12, the early believers who got converted to Christianity were having
fellowship, devoting themselves to the teachings of and sharing their properties, praying together
and reading the scripture daily. Through reading the scripture, the people of Berea were equipped
to the knowledge of the word of God and prove the teachings of the apostle Paul and others to
see if were true (Acts 17:10-12). In Hebrews 10:25 the writer of Hebrews insisted the believers
continued in fellowship and gathering.
5.2.3 Prayer
This is one of the reasons which helped the early Church when it faced challenges, it used prayer.
Prayer is an act of communicating to the Creator who is above all and when People prayed, the
Church continued. For example, in the Book of Acts, apostles used to pray before everything
they planned to do like preaching the Gospel, replacing Judas’ position, electing 7 deacons and
other activities. So, if the Rubungo Church need to grow, it’s members must pray and depend on
God fully. This goes in the line of Samuel Kunhiyop who says that “Prayer is an important aspect
of the work of the community of God. It includes confession of sins (Ps 32:5; Ezra 10:1; 1 John

Progress of the Gospel. Eugene, Oregon, WIPF & STOCK. Page 114.

1:9), supplication (Ps 30:8; Eph 6:18; Ph 4:6), adoration and thanks giving (Eph 5:19-20) and
intercession (Jas 5:16). Intercession is prayer offered by a believer on behalf of someone else.
We can pray effectively for others because the church is a priesthood of believers (Rev 5:10).
The New Testament contains many examples of intercessory prayers (Rom 15:5-6; 13; 2 Cor
13:7; Eph 3:16-19; 6:18; 1 Thess 3:10-13; 5:23; 2 Thess 2:17; 3:5-6; Heb 13:21.”45
Weil Roger adds “The early Church learnt to depend upon God for its very survival through
united prayer (acts 4:24-31). When their leader, Peter, was put in prison he was miraculously
delivered in answer to the united prayers of the church (Acts12:5-11). Prayer is a mighty weapon
and the Church learns to use it against all its enemies. Prayer expresses the fact that we are
completely dependent upon God for all our needs. Jesus often prayed to his father and taught his
follower to do the same. He told us to do so all times (Luke 18:1), privately (Matthew 6:6), and
with others (Matthew 18:19-20). He was emphasized that faith in God’s ability to answer prayer
is essential if we want to receive answers from him (Matthew 21: 21-22). Prayer must always be
made in the name of Christ (John 14:13), and our requests must be in accordance with God’s
revealed will (1 John 5:14).”46
5.3.0 The factors that affect the Church growth of Rubungo Parish in the Diocese of Lweru.
5.3.1 Scattering due to Persecution
In Acts 8:1b-3 after Stephen’s death believers scattered due to persecution and Saul started
destroying the body of Christ and fear ruled in the heart of believers and the Church lost
fellowship, community and some godly men. Although people lost their homes, lives, properties,

_ Weil Roger, Pg. 35
_ Kunhiyop Waje Samuel, Pg. 166

peace and place of worship, some were courage to keep witnessing the gospel wherever they
went for refuge, and this was similar to Kagera region during Amin war many people lost their
homes, relatives, properties, peace and so on and this caused the Church of Rubungo Parish to
grow slowly.
5.3.2 Prosperity Gospel
In the letter to Galatians 1:6 Paul is astonishing because of the prosperity gospel where people
stated following the false gospel. This is one among many factors affecting the Church from
growing when the ministers start preaching false gospel like blessings through planting seeds, or
protection through salts, oil, water and others. The Rubungo Church need to stick on the right
teaching because people who are rooted in the right doctrine, they are able to standard without
being taken by other new teachings since it is in urban where there are all kind of teaching. Paul
wrote a letter to Timothy to deal with the false gospel as David putts, “the letters were written to
deal with the false teachings which was negatively impacting the young Churches.” 47 Paul
encourages Timothy to make this clear and this does not stop at his words, but his whole life
must bear out what he teaches others. So, he has to watch himself, and watch his teachings.
Timothy was to do his best to claim the gospel benefits in greater fullness. He was to fight a
good fight as a soldier of God in his pursuit of holiness, his persistence in in service, and in the
protection of the gospel. Timothy, like all believers, must focus his adoration on the glorious
Christ (1 Timothy 6:11-16).

_ David S. Dockery. (1998). The Holman Concise Bible Commentary. B&H Publishing Group: Nashville,
Tennessee. Page 603.

5.3.3 Conflict among the believers
In 2 Corinthians 1:11-13 Paul emphases on the unity because disunity brings conflict and Paul
wrote to them to tell them that neither for Apollo, nor for Cephas nor for Paul but for Christ.
Also, one of the reasons why Paul wrote the letter to Romans was to emphasize unity among
believers because Jews and Gentiles were seemed different and Paul wrote to bring them
together and show that they are one in Christ. So, as it has been discussed in the findings, that
Choirs are disagreeing each other, Church minister with fellow as well as some believers, it is a
call through the word of God to live in love with one another as Jesus’ new Command in
Matthew 22:36-40 and Paul adds saying “You, my brothers, were called to be free. But do not use
your freedom to indulge the flesh; rather, serve one another in love. The entire law is summed up
in a single command: “Love your neighbor as yourself.” [Lev. 19:18] If you keep on biting and
devouring each other, watch out or you will be destroyed by each other (Gal 5:13-15). This agree
with Isom’s point that “The reason why some people are leaving Churches today is because they
feel they are not being spiritual nourished, and they are tired of being in a Church where there is
only chaos and no love.”48
5.3.4 Sin among believers
In the Church sin is another problem stopping the Church from growth. In 1 Corinthians 5:1-5
Paul is warning people who were committing adultery in the Church to be excommunicated. As
the discussion above, the Church need discipline sometimes to maintain purity and holiness
through preaching the right Gospel, rebuking their sins, and so on. According to this Passage, if
the Rubungo Parish need to grow spiritual and be strong in the faith as it has been discussed in

_ Isom, Pg. 216

the findings, Church members need to confess their sin and live according to their faith and
calling. This lines with Isom points that “the declining Church discipline is perhaps the most
visible failure of the contemporary Church. No longer concerned with maintaining purity of
confession or lifestyle, the contemporary Church sees itself as a voluntary association of
autonomous members, with minimal moral accountability to God, much less to each other.”49

_ Ibid, Pg. 216

CHAPTER SIX: SUMMARY, CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS
6.0 Introduction
This chapter presents summaries of study findings as per the study objectives, conclusions based
on those findings and recommendations based on both the study findings and other relevant
literature considered necessary and vital to be used in future to improve the study situation.
6.1.0 Summary of Major Findings
This section shows summary of the major findings in accordance with research objectives and
questions.
6.1.1 How the Church growth influence Rubungo Parish in the Diocese of Lweru
Findings revealed that 47.1% of the respondents said that listening and ready to learn from others
who have succeeded is the only way how the Church growth can influence Rubungo Parish in
the Diocese of Lweru. It was also established that 41.1% of the respondents said that proper
management of Church resources is the only way how the Church growth can influence Rubungo
Parish in the Diocese of Lweru
The above findings show some degree of agreement with to Northouse, “Servant leaders
emphasize improving the well-being of their followers, building community, and developing
people by modeling Christlike behavior. A positive attitude coupled with a faithful commitment
to serve others is fundamental to this leadership model. These pastors believe that a ministry
candidate grows stronger, healthier, and more autonomous as they focus on serving others. Like
other leadership models, servant leaders seek to empower their followers by giving them the

freedom to make decisions and be self-sufficient. However, the overarching goal for this
leadership model is to create healthy Church environs that can enhance follower and
organizational performance, stimulate growth, and make a significant impact on the communities
and cities in proximity to the Church.”50
Samuel Kunhiyop who stated that the concept of the Church as a community also resonates with
Africans because of the scope of this community. It includes all believers worldwide and each
local community (Church) and is also connected to the past (believer who have died) and to the
future (those who have yet to be born spiritually). This way of seeing the Church acknowledges
the role of our spiritual ancestors. These ancestors are the dead (Hebrew and Christian) who are
interested in our lives and exert influence over them, serving as examples and encouragement for
us. Hebrews 12:1 talks of them when it speaks of the “witnesses that surround us”, referring to
the heroes of the faith whose names are listed in Hebrews 11)).”51 As Dever Mark says, “Church
does not simply refer to an organizational unit of any particular religion....but is a thoroughly
Christian word... the Church is primarily a body of people who profess and give evidence that
they have been saved by God’s grace alone, for his glory alone, through faith alone, in Christ
alone.”52
6.1.2 Identification of the growth of the Church of Rubungo Parish in the Diocese of Lweru
Findings indicated that 23.5% of the respondents identified good leadership as the growth of the
Church of Rubungo Parish in the Diocese of Lweru. In addition, findings also revealed that

_ Northouse, Pg. 225-336

17.7% of the respondents identified the unity among Church leaders and congregation as the
growth of the Church of Rubungo Parish in the Diocese of Lweru.
The above findings are in line with Gebre Worancha who stated that; (1) There must be a climate
of happiness and loving God and one another in the church; (2) the Church must have a Biblecentered atmosphere that demonstrates by its regular and continuous Bible studies; (3) the
members of the Church must be enthusiastic and become the cause for maintaining enthusiasm;
(4) the Church must be evangelistic and zealous to win lost souls for Christ; (5) a growing
Church should be able to claim backslidden members; (6) a growing Church should have great
faith to practice its vision; (7) a growing Church should be a praying Church that prays for its
spiritual growth and for God’s work throughout the world; and (8) a growing Church believes in
the Holy Scripture — “Scripture and Scripture alone”—and do and live what it says (Mt 7:21; Lu
6:46; 11:28; Rom 2:13; 1Jo 3:7 Jam 1:22).”53 The above findings are also in line with Millard
who states that, “Jesus stated that his purpose in coming was not to be served, but to serve (Matt.
20:28). In becoming incarnate he took upon himself the form of a servant (Phil. 2:7). “And being
found in appearance as a man, he humbled himself and become obedient to death – even on a
cross!” (v.8). the Church must display a similar willingness to serve. It has been placed in the
world to serve lord and the world, not to be exalted and have its own needs and desires satisfied.
Although the Church may attain great size, wealth, and prestige that is not its purpose.”54 To
further support the above findings, one of the respondents interviewed had this to say;

_ Gebre Worancha AAMM, Vol. 5,

“Cooperative in the Church is the key aspect in growth of the Church. When there is
cooperation in Rubungo Parish there is Church growth”.
6.1.3 The factors that affect the Church growth of Rubungo Parish in the Diocese of Lweru
Findings indicated that 23.5% of the respondents said that conflicts in Church is a factor that
affects the church growth of Rubungo Parish in the Diocese of Lweru. Findings also revealed
that 20.6% of the respondents said that poverty and lack of basic needs among Church members
is a factor affecting the Church growth of Rubungo Parish in the Diocese of Lweru.
The above findings are in line with O. C. Isom II who states that “The most common disease that
infects the Church today is conflict.... this disease called “conflict” is caused by the transferring
of words, such as, “We’ve never done it that way before, so why is the pastor going this way?”
and other negative and destructive words...this sinful spirit is an evil disease that has spread and
wiped away so much unity in churches in the Body of Christ. God looks at the Church as a
body.”55
6.2 Conclusions
In conclusion, the findings of the study indicated that listening and ready to learn from others
who have succeeded is the only way how the Church growth can influence Rubungo Parish in
the Diocese of Lweru. Good leadership is the growth of the Church of Rubungo Parish in the
Diocese of Lweru. In addition, conflicts in Church are a major factor that affects the Church
growth of Rubungo Parish in the Diocese of Lweru.

6.3 Recommendations
The study recommends that the Rubungo Parish should focus on listening and learning from
others who have succeeded in Church growth as the only way to influence the growth of
Rubungo Parish in the Diocese of Lweru.
The study recommends that there should be good leadership in Rubungo Parish that can
stimulate the growth of the Church of Rubungo Parish in the Diocese of Lweru.
In addition, there should be strict mechanisms of conflicts resolution in the Church in a bid to
foster Church growth of Rubungo Parish in the Diocese of Lweru.
6.4 Areas of Future Research
It is important that other future studies extend to other geographical areas for better
understanding of the factors affecting the growth of the urban Churches.
Other studies can also focus on the possible ways of promoting Church growth.

REFERENCE
Berkhof Louis, (1949), Systematic Theology: The Banner of Truth Trust; Grand Rapids,
Michigan.
Beth Snodderly and A. Scott Moreau. (2011). Evangelical and Frontier Mission: Perspective on
the Global Progress of the Gospel. Eugene, Oregon, WIPF & STOCK.
David S. Dockery. (1998). The Holman Concise Bible Commentary. B&H Publishing Group:
Nashville, Tennessee.
Dever Mark, (2000), Nine Marks of a Healthy Church, 3rd Ed: Published by Crossway;
Wheaton,
Illinois.
Erickson J. Millard, (1983), Christian Theology; 3rd edition: Published Baker, Grand Rapids,
Michigan.
Grudem Wayne, (1994), Systematic Theology, an Introduction to Biblical Doctrine: Inter-Varsity
Press; Grand Rapids, Michigan.
Hazlitt William, (2009), Martin Luther’s Table talk; Luther’s comments on life, the Church and
the Bible: Christian Focus Publications, Geanies House, Scotland.
James A. Scherer, Stephen B. Bevans. (1994). New Directions in Missions and Evangelism 2:
Theological Foundations.
Kunhiyop, W. Samuel, (2012), African Christian Theology: Grand Rapids: Zondervan.
Martin, Carlos G. (1995). Principles and Procedures of Adventist Church Growth. Class notes
for
MSSN 600, Adventist International Institute of Advanced Studies, Silang, Cavite,

Philippines.

O. C. Isom (2014), Wounds caused by Gossip Attitudes and Conflicts within the Church: Author
House, Bloomington.
Personal Research notes in the third year, 1st Semester (2015), Munguishi Bible College,
Tanzania.
Peter G. Northouse. (2013). Leadership: Theory and Practice, 7th ed. Thousand Oaks, CA:
SAGE.
Rainer, Thom S. (1993). The Book of Church Growth: History, Theology, and Principles.
Broadman Press: Nashville.
Reader’s Digest Wordpower Dictionary: Oxford University Press, London.
The Application Bible Life Study, New International Version edition. (1997). Tyndale House
Publishers, Carol Stream, Illinois.
The Holy Bible, Revised Standard Version. (1901). William Collins Sons & Co. Ltd. New York.
Thomas A. Baima, (2007), What is a Parish? Canonical, Pastoral, and Theological
Perspectives:
Published by the Archdiocese of Chicago: Liturgy Training Publications.
Town, Elmer L. (March 1986). The Relationship of Church Growth and Systematic Theology,
Journal of the Evangelical Society, 29(1).
Weil Roger, (2007), Foundations of the Christian Faith: Grace Publications Trust, 7 Arlington
Way, London.

Worancha, Gebre. (2009). I Must Preach This Gospel: God’s Mission and Accountability of His
Church in This End-Time AAMM, Vol. 5. Everlasting Gospel Publishing Association:
Seoul, Korea.

Wright Eric, (1994), Church – No Spectator Sport: Evangelical Press, Darlington Reader’s
Digest
Wordpower Dictionary.

APPENDICES
APPENDIX I: QUESTIONNAIRE
“FACTORS AFFECTING THE GROWTH OF THE URBAN CHURCHES OF THE DIOCESE
OF LWERU WITH SPECIAL REFERENCE TO RUBUNGO PARISH IN MULEBA
DISTRICT.”
I, Anold Ebyakagonza Edward, am pursuing a Bachelor of Divinity of Uganda Christian
University dealing with the above study topic. I am humbly requesting you to answer all these
questions with a lot of sincerity and honesty so that they can help me in accomplishing my
project.
The information you give will be used only for the purpose of this study and is very helpful and I
pledge to treat this confidential. Put √ (tick) in the appropriate place and write short
understandable explanations where requested in spaces provided.
SECTION A. PERSONAL INFORMATION