BSCS_2:1 (BSc. Computer Science)
(2nd Year Undergraduate, 1st Semester)
University
Uganda Christian University (UCU), Main Campus
School /Faculty
ENGINEERING, DESIGN AND TECHNOLOGY
Department
Computing and Technology
Programme
Bachelor of Science in Computer Science
Course Code
DSC2103
Course Title
Data Science
Lecture Hours
Practical Hours
Study Hours
Contact Hours
Credit Units
Course Designer (s)
Miss. Immaculate Kamusiime


Course Lecturer(s)
Miss. Immaculate Kamusiime
Miss. Desire Namanya
Welcome message
Welcome to the Data Science course! In this course, you will be exposed to a multidisciplinary
domain that uses scientific methods, processes, statistics, and computational languages to draw
knowledge and insights from unstructured data.

Description
Students will explore the theoretical issues, methods, tools, and problems that relate to data-rich issues
in the humanities, social sciences, and sciences. Students will learn the core concepts of statistics and
computing while working hands-on with real data. We will examine real-world examples and cases to
place data science techniques in the Ugandan context, develop data-analytic thinking, and illustrate
that proper application is as much an art as it is a science. In addition, we will work hands-on with the
R programming language and its associated data analysis libraries/packages.

Audience Description
This is a course intended Year 2, Semester 1, Computer Science
Delivery Mode
1. Group and Individual Projects
2. Traditional Classroom-Based Teaching (online and in-person)
3. Practical Lab Sessions
Course Objectives
 To develop practical data analysis skills, which can be applied to practical problems.
 To develop fundamental knowledge of concepts underlying data science projects from multiple
disciplines.
 To develop practical skills needed in modern analytics.
 To give a hands-on experience with real-world data analysis.
 To develop applied experience with data science languages
Expected Learning Outcomes
The students should be able to;
 Incorporate data science principles to address data-dependent questions in the humanities,
social sciences, and sciences.
 Apply basic exploratory analysis to identify abnormalities in data (i.e., missing values,
outliers, redundant features, etc.)
 Anticipate and identify ways in which sampled data may be biased
 Perform the appropriate feature transformations for processing quantitative and qualitative


data
 Develop and deploy a Machine Learning model

Brief Content Description
 Week 1 – Week 4: Foundation of Data Science (Experimental designs/business intelligence,
data classification, data descriptive statistics, data exploration using Python, data
visualization using Microsoft Office Excel/Tableau).
 Week 5: Assessment 1
 Week 5: Exploratory data analysis of quantitative & qualitative data types
 Week 6-Week 9: Introduction to Machine Learning, Supervised Learning &
Unsupervised Learning
 Week 10: Assessment 2
 Week 10: Time Series Forecasting
 Week 11: Assessment 3 (Course Project)
 Week 11: ML model deployment
 Week 12: End of Semester Exam

Teaching and Learning Methods
 Discussions,
 Case studies
Learner Support Plan
 Face-to-face meetings
 Zoom meetings
 Pre-recorded lectures
 Group discussions



Resources/Teaching and Learning Materials
These will mainly be disseminated through the UCU eLearning system and the
university library system KOHA. They will include;
 Pre-recorded lectures
 Presentation Slides
 Textbooks and eBooks
 MOOMs and YouTube videos
 interactive quizzes, demonstrations, charts and diagrams
 Open Educational Resources (OER) like; Academic papers and articles
 https://library.ucu.ac.ug/index.php/eresources/ejournals
 https://catalogue.library.ucu.ac.ug

Course Plan Assessment
Coursework (Quizzes and tests, Lab activities, Take-home assignments, Group tasks): 40
EXAM: (Written, Practical): 60
Supporting Technologies
 Discussion forums (Kaggle, R Community (Posit)
 wikis,
 journals
 PowerPoint
 Moodle
 Software installation for R and RStudio (https://posit.co/products/open-source/)
 Excel, Tableau (for analysis and visualization)
Additional Reading
 Learn R for Applied Statistics with Data Visualizations, Regressions, and
Statistics by Eric Goh Ming Hui (https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-4200-1)