This study assessed the influence of internet marketing on consumer purchase decision in Jumia
Uganda. Specifically the study was guided by the following objectives: to establish the effect of
social media marketing on consumer purchase decision in Jumia Uganda: to determine the
influence of website marketing on consumer purchase decision in Jumia Uganda and to establish
email marketing on consumer purchase decision in Jumia Uganda. The study predominantly
employed qualitative and questionnaire approach, a sample size of 217 was selected where a
response rate of 96 percentages were obtained, 12 interview guides and a documentation review
checklist were used to collect data samples of respondents. Data was analysed by use of both
qualitative and quantitative analysis techniques. Data analysis involved use of both descriptive
and inferential statistics such as; mean, standard deviation, percentage, correlation coefficient
and regression analysis. Findings show that there was a positive correlation (r=.26.6) between
social media marketing and consumer purchase decision in Jumia Uganda. Thus social media
marketing accounted for 26.6% change in consumer purchase decision in Jumia Uganda.
Findings also showed that there was a positive correlation (r=.042) between website marketing
and consumer purchase decision in Jumia Uganda. Thus website marketing accounted for 42%
change in consumer purchase decision in Jumia Uganda. Lastly, findings revealed that there was
a positive correlation (r=.66.2) between e-mail marketing and consumer purchase decision in
Jumia Uganda. Thus e-mail marketing accounted for 66.2% change in consumer purchase
decision in Jumia Uganda. It was concluded that Jumia Uganda observes internet marketing
activities such as online visitor, display adverts sharing of content, optimised search engine
optimization, e-mail campaigns so as to affect consumer purchase decision. It is thus
recommended that there is need for Jumia Uganda to ensure that internet marketing activities
offer information satisfaction since it affects the quality of goods that are offered hence need to
improve the quality of service.
Furthermore, online shopping pages should offer immerse choice, data servicing, steadfastness
and item examination considering developing trust online is complicated than the normal outlets.
Lastly, consumer with internet experience should be in position to embrace and utilize online
information due to the high confidence likely influenced by online reviews which impact
consumer purchase decision.

CHAPTER ONE