Attaining self –satisfaction remains one of the most pressing challenges affecting global citizens.
Although volunteering may provide one of the pathways to self-satisfaction, opportunities to
volunteer are profoundly limited. The study explored the impact of volunteering in an agency and
its impact on self-satisfaction in Bukhalu sub-county, Bulambuli District. Specifically, the study
explored the different volunteering types that exist and the impact of volunteering in an agency on
self-satisfaction in Bukhalu sub-county, Bulambuli District. The study also investigated factors
that hinder volunteering in an agency in Bukhalu sub-county, Bulambuli District. The study used
qualitative case study design to analyze data from the study area with the help of both qualitative
and quantitative methods. The researcher collected data from 15 respondents in the study area who
were selected using simple random and purpose sampling and questionnaires together with
interview guide were used to collect data. The study discovered that volunteering in schools is one
form of volunteering available. Others are corporate volunteering, community volunteer work and
welfare volunteering is a form of volunteering. Findings show that volunteering is relevant for
people of all ages as a source of social capital and goodwill and this helps to enhance selfsatisfaction it is an important pathway for enhancing youth employment and employability,
address and volunteering is associated with better mental health in older adulthood. Findings
further revealed that because volunteering could enlarge social network size, its effects would be
more pronounced for people who have fewer social contacts. Additionally, findings show that
factors that have been identified as hindering volunteering in formal organizations include a lack
of time or interest and health problems and people don’t have information about where to
volunteer, or if they do, the jobs are not meaningful or purposeful as well as absence of
volunteering programmes for people hinder volunteering in an agency. Other findings show that
potential volunteers can be discouraged by formal recruitment procedures such as completing a
long registration form or attending interviews. The study recommended that government and
stakeholders should put in place initiatives to bolster volunteering culture and government in
conjunction with local leaders should implement labour-friendly legislation to attract and retain
volunteers and agencies should provide information to the public regarding opportunities for
volunteering

CHAPTER ONE