Dependence
GROUP 3

Key Definitions in Dependence
Dependence: the condition of being habitually and compulsively occupied with or
involved in something, that you cannot control, and despite negative consequences.
Social-recreational use: use of substances in social settings to increase euphoria and
enhance enjoyment.
Misuse: intensified use characterized by regular, daily, or long-term use.
Tolerance: the need for more of the behavior to get the same effect.
Withdrawal: potentially falling sick when attempting to stop the behavior.
Craving: an intense desire to continue the behavior.
Abuse: continuous behavior despite knowing the problems associated with it.

Tobacco
It is smoked, chewed, and dipped in various forms around the world, smoking
being the most common.
Cigarettes have nicotine that is addictive and other harmful chemicals like
carbon monoxide and cyanide that cause cancers and lung disease.
Tobacco use typically begins through social contact and is reinforced by
physiological dependence derived from nicotine.
It is the 2nd major cause of death globally and responsible for 1 in 10 adult
deaths. It is the 4th common risk factor for disease.

Alcohol
In the case of beer, wine, liquor, spirits, and brews, what matters is
how much is consumed. Wine usually has a higher alcohol per milliliter
percentage than beer. Liquors have more than wine.
Beers range from 6-8% alcohol.
Liquors with higher concentrations of 40-80% alcohol.
Waragi, distilled liquor, has 40% alcohol.

Other drugs
Common drugs in Uganda include mairungi and marijuana now known as weed. Other
drugs are less common but are increasing in availability.
Not all drugs are addictive. Doctors prescribe many helpful drugs but some prescribed
can be abused.
Other substances one can be addicted to are caffeine, more commonly found in coffee
and energy drinks. The consequences of its use have not been recorded to be as bad.
Drugs give temporary feelings of euphoria, joy, relief, enhanced alertness, and a feeling of
control.

Understanding Dependence
The word “addiction” is often substituted for “dependence” by professionals
these days. It is present in a person who demonstrates any combination of three or
more of the following symptoms in the same 12-month period.
•
Preoccupation with the use of
the substance in periods.
•
Using more of the substance
than anticipated.
•
Developing tolerance to the
substance.
•
“Withdrawal syndrome” from
the substance.
•
Using the substance to avoid or
control withdrawal symptoms
• Repeated efforts to cut back or stop
substance use
• Intoxication at inappropriate times
• Reduction in social and
occupational activities
• Continued abuse despite suffering
related social, emotional, and or
physical problems .

Addictions besides Alcohol, Tobacco, and
Drugs
These are things people habitually and compulsively occupied with or involved in a Habit,
a repeated behavior. Compulsive means it goes from one controlling it to being controlled by
it.
Eating
Gambling
Sex
Work
Television
Exercise
Social Media
Even prayer

Progression from Use to Dependence
Substance Use: Under this, we have experimental use; usually from curiosity
or peer pressure, recreational use; that is use in social settings to increase
euphoria, and situational use; short-term use to cope with a problem.
Misuse: intensified use characterized by regular or daily long-term use of a
drug or several in combination. At this stage, tolerance, withdrawal, and
craving arise.
Abuse: This occurs when one continues the behavior despite knowing its
social, mental, emotional, and physical hazards and impacts on them and
those around them.
Dependence: One becomes dependent when compulsive use the
person’s behavior is no longer tied to pleasure, peer acceptance, or
situational issues, but simply getting by in a day.

Stopping Dependence
Addiction can be stopped, but you have to know what is underneath the problem. If
you want to stop the problem, you need to deal with the factors that led to the problem.
To help someone overcome this, you have to get past those reasons for starting and
continuing use.
Overcome the denial. Getting a person to admit they have a problem is a huge task.
Stop the behavior. Break away from the consumption or the behavior. Nobody will
reduce and sustain the reduction.
Get through withdrawal. This may be a medical problem, especially if an alcoholic has
high blood pressure or diabetes. You need a good 3 days to a week to get through this.
Improve your leisure time activities – find fun things to do, like art, or sports, or playing
games with friends. Nature walks are great. Improve in your work skills – apply yourself to craft
or trade
Improve your education – not necessarily for a certificate, just for its natural reward
Ignore feelings of shame. A big part of recovery is being aware you made mistakes.
Others will also point them out to you. Know that you are on the path to recovery and those
mistakes will fade in the background.

The 12 Steps of Recovery
1.
We admitted we were powerless over alcohol — that our lives had become unmanageable.
2.
Came to believe that a Power greater than ourselves could restore us to sanity.
3.
Decide to turn our will and our lives over to the care of God.
4.
Made a searching and fearless moral inventory of ourselves.
5.
Admitted to God, to ourselves, and to another human being the exact nature of our wrongs.
6.
Were entirely ready to have God remove all these defects of character.
7.
Humbly asked Him to remove our shortcomings.
8.
Made a list of all persons we had harmed and became willing to make amends to them all.
9.
Made direct amends to such people wherever possible, except when to do so would injure
them or others.
10. Continued to take personal inventory and when we were wrong promptly admitted it.
11. Sought through prayer and meditation to improve our conscious contact with God, praying
only for knowledge of His will for us and the power to carry that out.
12. Having had a spiritual awakening as the result of these steps, we tried to carry this message
to alcoholics, and to practice these principles in all our affairs.