Prepared to Believe: The Evangelism of Preschoolers
and Infant Baptism in African Anglican Churches
This article discusses the cognitive status of preschool children based
on the insights of the child psychologist Jean Piaget. Building on this, a
strategy is offered for the evangelism of preschoolers and the expected
outcome of this evangelism is the formation of their worldview into a
Christian one. This prepares them to believe the gospel when they reach
a developmental stage in which faith and unbelief become part of their
mental posture. Given their commitment to infant baptism, African
Anglican churches must prioritise theological studies focused on children
in order to carry out such evangelism.
1. Introduction
Demographics show that Africa’s population, as is widely known round
the world, is youthful. This fact can obscure an important aspect of
Africa’s population in regard to children, viz., Africa’s population
pyramid continues to expand at the base, making children the most
populous age group. In Uganda, for example, 50% of the population is
below the age of 18 years, whilst 25% of the population is below the
age of 5. In consequence, the shortage of Anglican theological literature
on children puts Anglican churches in Africa at a distinct disadvantage
for theological education and pastoral practice. This article will propose
ways for African Anglican churches and families to evangelise their
preschool-age children and the outcomes they should anticipate from such
evangelism.1 These methods of evangelism are grounded in preschoolers’
cognitive status, based upon the insights of Jean Piaget and linked to
worldview formation. The methods are also especially appropriate for
the evangelism of preschoolers in Anglican churches on account of their
practice of infant baptism.
Evangelism is understood as the proclamation of the gospel.2 This
is the case when the term is understood from the standpoint of its use in
the New Testament, or from the standpoint of the content of apostolic
preaching, or even from the standpoint of those labelled as evangelists in
1 In childhood studies, “preschoolers” are children aged 3–6/7 years old.
2 This use of the term therefore does not rely on the state of the hearers, whether
believers or unbelievers, baptised or not. The issue in this article is ultimately how
to communicate the gospel to children, or “pass on the gospel to them” and we will
use the term evangelism as the best way to capture this.
The Global Anglican 134/4 (2020):299–316

the NT. This understanding of evangelism is seen, for example, in a 1944
report commissioned by William Temple, Archbishop of Canterbury,
Towards the Conversion of England. The report was clear that evangelism
concerned the “eternal gospel” and its intelligible presentation.3 C.
Robert Harrison has argued that this understanding is “nearly ubiquitous
in the Church’s conversation about evangelism.”4 This ubiquitous view of
evangelism in Anglican churches is also seen in a second Anglican plan of
evangelism, the “Decade of Evangelism” (Lambeth 1988, resolution 43),
which called on Anglican churches to close the decade “with a renewed
and united effort at making Christ known to the people of the world.”5
This is also the view of evangelism in African Anglican churches where it
is common knowledge that evangelism is taken to be preaching the gospel
in church, market places, in the streets, in homes, etc.
Given that this paper is about the evangelism of preschoolers, I
concern myself with how the gospel can be proclaimed to preschoolers in
Anglican churches, thereby passing on the faith to them.
In what follows, I will first examine children’s cognitive status,
drawing on studies of child psychology by Jean Piaget. I will then use
this discussion to propose ways in which children should be evangelised
before turning to consider the outcomes of such evangelism. I will then
relate Anglican churches’ liturgy for infant baptism to the evangelism
of preschoolers demonstrating thereby that these methods are highly
appropriate for evangelism of preschoolers in Anglican churches. I will
finally conclude with some thoughts on what needs to happen if African
Anglican churches are to carry out this kind of evangelism.
Since relative to older persons children have distinct ways of thinking
and therefore knowing, their evangelism in Anglican churches as well
as elsewhere would be ill-informed if it were conducted in ignorance of,
amongst other things, their cognitive status. I elect to use Jean Piaget’s
insights in discussing children’s cognitive status because his work on child
psychology gave the world penetrating insights into children’s cognitive
status and thus continues to have considerable influence. In the remarks
of one, “assessing the impact of Piaget on developmental psychology is
like assessing the impact of Shakespeare on English literature, or Aristotle
3 Commission on Evangelism, Towards the Conversion of England (Toronto: Dent
and Sons, 1945).
4 C. Robert Harrison, Jr., “Competing Views of Evangelism in the Episcopal
Church,” AThR 75.2 (1993): 218–36.
5 Anglican Consultative Council, The Truth Shall Make you Free: The Lambeth
Conference 1988, The Reports, Resolutions, and Pastoral Letters from the Bishops
(London: Church House, 1988), 231. A report to the same conference defined
evangelism as “the communication of the good news of Christ’s Kingdom” (p. 43).

in Philosophy—impossible.”6 For these reasons a paper dealing with the
evangelism of preschoolers in Anglican churches in the light of Piaget’s
work has considerable merit.
This merit is amplified by virtue of the fact that there is virtually no
critical literature available on the evangelism of children that is informed
by understandings of children’s cognitive capacities.7 Nevertheless, in
discussing the moral training of children as an aspect of evangelism,
Attfield mentions suggestively the possibility of using the work of child
psychologists, Piaget and Kohlberg, when he writes, “school and church
alike are keen to develop moral thinking, possibly along the lines of
developmental theories such as those of Kohlberg and Piaget.”8 Building
on this, we will consider the cognitive status of preschoolers upon which
my proposal for evangelism will be based.
2. Concrete Thinking and Capacities for Concrete Thinking:
Children’s Cognitive Status
One way to view the cognitive status of children according to the studies
of Jean Piaget is by considering human thinking from two perspectives.
The first perspective is to the two ways human beings think, namely,
concretely and abstractly. Thinking concretely is with reference to people,
places, objects, and experiences; thinking abstractly is with reference
to ideas and immaterial concepts, to non-representational symbols (or
symbols not representing in appearance anything in human environment
or life), and with reference to propositions or principles. The second
perspective is to understand human thinking in terms of forms (or
distinct areas) of thinking, which are distinct mental activities, including:
judging, interpreting, comparing and contrasting, classifying, planning,
remembering, analysing, synthesising, problem solving, trouble shooting,
making decisions, and strategising.
6 From an anonymous reviewer in O. Lourenco, “In Defense of Piaget’s Theory: A
Reply to 10 Common Criticisms,” Psychological Review 103.1 (1996), 143.
7 See, e.g., Franklin I. Sheeder, “Evangelism and Christian Education,” Christian
Education 30.4 (1947): 349–58; Gideon G. Yoder, The Nurture and Evangelism
of Children (Scottdale, PA: Herald, 1959); Kenneth L. Chafin, “Evangelism and
the Child,” RevExp 60.2 (1963): 161–71; Robert A. Proctor, Jr., “Children and
Evangelism,” RevExp 63.1 (1966): 55–63; Edward L. Hayes, “Evangelism of
Children,” BSac 132.527 (1975): 250–64; Perry G. Downs, “Child Evangelization,”
CEJ 3.2 (1983): 5–13; Karen Marie Yust, “Toddler Spiritual Formation and the
Faith Community,” International Journal of Children’s Spirituality 8.2 (2003):133–
49; Dennis Horton, “Ministry Students Ages of Conversion with Implications for
Childhood Evangelism and Baptism Practices,” CEJ 7.1 (2010): 30–51.
8 D. G. Attfield, “Child-Evangelism and Religious Education,” BJRE 16.1 (1993):
39–46 (43).

In regard to the first perspective for understanding children’s
thinking, Piaget classified the capacity for concrete thinking in children in
stages relative to their ages. The first stage of concrete thinking he named
“sensori-motor,” which is found in children aged 0–2 years (infants and
toddlers). Sensori-motor thinking “deals only with real entities, and each
of its actions thus involves only very short distances between subject and
objects,”9 and “only leads to practical satisfaction, i.e. to the success of
the action and not to knowledge as such.”10 The second stage of concrete
thinking in children he called “intuitive (or preoperational) thinking”
which is found in children aged 3–6/7 years (preschoolers). As we shall later
discuss, intuitive thinking is concrete thinking limited to the perspective of
the subject, “always ‘centred’ on a particular state of the object and a point
of view peculiar to the subject.”11 Piaget labelled the last stage of concrete
thinking in children “concrete operational thinking” which is found in
children age 7/8–12 years (school-age children). Concrete operational
thinking is concrete thinking characterised by certain operations of
thought. These operations of thought classify, serialise or number objects,
order time and measure speed, and structure and measure space. In other
words, they are “logico-arithmetical and spatio-temporal operations”12
performed through thinking. We now consider in some detail, following
Piaget’s framework, the capacities for concrete thinking of preschoolers
and thereby seek to understand their cognitive status.
When children acquire language at about 2 years old, they manifest
two crucial forms of thinking which increase their concrete thinking
capacity, both of which are crucial for concept development. These
forms of thinking are “comparing and contrasting” and, its corollary,
“classifying” of things. With these forms of thinking, preschoolers are able
to form concrete concepts (the grouping of concrete things on the basis
of similarities or commonalities of properties, relations, characteristics,
appearances, functions etc.). Consequently, they experience a leap in their
knowledge of people, objects, and activities. This leap in their knowledge
is tied to the way human beings understand, and make sense of, their
world, which is primarily through concepts. So, once a child has words
and names for various objects, s/he begins to organise and group them
in his/her mind, use the concepts as a basis for further exploration and
knowledge of the world and extend his/her thinking of objects “beyond
the limits of near space and time.”13
9 Jean Piaget, The Psychology of Intelligence, trans. Malcolm Piercy and D. E.
Berlyne, Routledge Classics (London: Routledge, 2001), 133.
10 Piaget, Psychology, 133.
11 Piaget, Psychology, 156.
12 Piaget, Psychology, 153.
13 Piaget, Psychology, 134.

However, Piaget identified four limitations in the mental operations
of preschoolers which affect their concrete thinking capacity in the areas
of “classification” and “interpretation.” In regard to “classification,” the
limitations on their mental operations make them incapable of grouping
the same class or relationship of things together properly. So, for example,
a dollar bill and a rough paper are classified as the same and both might
be thrown in the bin. In regard to “interpretation,” the limitations of
preschoolers’ mental operations limit their inferential abilities to one,
transductive inference, where preschoolers do not infer “by deduction but
by direct analogies”14 from a particular observation or experience to a
related particular one. So, for example, since doctors wear white coats,
anyone who wears a white coat is a doctor.
The four limitations on preschoolers’ mental operations identified
by Piaget were centration, conservation, irreversibility, and seriation. By
centration, Piaget referred to preschoolers’ mental inability to decentre, or
take on another’s perspective. In his words, “the adult thinks socially, even
when he is alone, and ... the child under 7 thinks ego-centrically, even in
the society of others.”15 Ego-centric thought characterises the thinking of
children, hence its labelling as intuitive thinking, “i.e. its reasoning is not
made explicit.”16 This kind of thinking is disinterested in questions of how
and why: “children do not talk about causality among themselves before
the age of 7 or 8. Such explanations as they give each other are rare and
factual. The questions they ask one another contain very few ‘whys,’ and
hardly any requests for a causal explanation.”17 By conservation, Piaget
referred to preschoolers’ mental inability to note what does not change in
transformations so that they do not see that when ice melts to water or
when water vaporises, the three are all the same substance; nor do they see
that a liquid remains of the same volume when poured from an elongated
glass into a broad one. By irreversibility Piaget referred to preschoolers’
mental difficulties to reverse sequences in their minds. For example, they
have the ability to predict the original order three balls will re-emerge in a
tube they have been pushed through but not the ability to predict in which
order they will appear at its other end: “All children foresee the original
order. The opposite order, on the other hand, is beyond them till about 4
or 5 years.”18 By seriation Piaget referred to preschoolers’ difficulties in
“arranging elements according to increasing or decreasing size.”19 It is
14 Piaget, Psychology, 141
15 Jean Piaget, The Language and Thought of the Child, trans. Marjorie and Ruth
Gabain, Routledge Classics (London: Routledge, 2002), 41.
16 Piaget, Language, 47.
17 Piaget, Language, 125–26.
18 Piaget, Language, 149
19 Jean Piaget and Barbel Inhelder, The Psychology of the Child, trans. Helen
Weaver (New York: Basis Books, 2000), 101.

not until “the operational level that seriation is achieved straight away, by
such a method as, for example, finding the smallest of all the terms and
then the next smallest, etc.”20
A compromise in preschoolers’ ability to classify things properly
into logical groups and to infer deductively is indicative of limitations
in the depth of knowledge they are capable of attaining. In other words,
since concepts are invariably related to the acquisition of knowledge of
people, animals, objects, substances and materials, experiences, events,
activities, etc.,21 one’s inability to form concepts into proper logical
groupings is reflective of gaps in one’s knowledge, resulting in what we
might call “surface” knowledge. Consequently a preschooler’s knowledge
of the world, on account of the four limitations Piaget pointed out, is of
a superficial kind, whereby “the child’s conception of things is at one and
the same time what they appear to be (phenomenalism)”22 and not as
they really are. This is to say that preschoolers are incapable of grasping
deeper knowledge of the world regardless of having the prerequisite forms
of thinking that can lead to such knowledge. This superficial knowledge
of preschoolers, Piaget pointed out, is what accounts for their fantastical
inner world in which there is no separation of, nor telling the difference
between, fact and fiction, reality from the imagined. In his words younger
children “find it far more difficult to distinguish between romancing and a
faithful rendering.”23 From the point of view of preschoolers’ limitation to
transductive inference, the “child’s incapacity for true causal explanation
and logical justification”24 or his/her giving “incomplete reason or
cause”25 for actions and events means that individual fantasy holds sway.
As it were, their magical world compensates for their inability to acquire
deeper knowledge that would help them to make sense of the world as it
really is and therefore have a more accurate picture of reality.
This typical inability in preschoolers to separate fact from fiction
is corroborated in children’s cognitive studies by literature in childhood
developmental psychology on theory of the mind.26 Theory of the mind
is “the ability to attribute mental states (beliefs, intentions, and desires)
20 Piaget, Language, 148.
21 “The world” from here on.
22 Piaget, Language, 276.
23 Piaget, Language, 127.
24 Piaget, Language, 241
25 Piaget, Language, 116.
26 See for example Henry M. Wellman, The Child’s Theory of the Mind (Cambridge,
MA: Bradford Books, 1990); W. V. Fabricius, T. W. Boyer, A. A. Weimer, and K.
Carroll, “True or False: Do Five-year-olds Understand Belief?” Developmental
Psychology 46 (2010): 1402–16; V. Slaughter, “Theory of Mind in Infants and
Young Children: A Review,” Australian Psychologist 50 (2015): 169–72.

to oneself and others,”27 which invariably requires one to be conscious
of beliefs, intentions and desires in oneself and in others. Of critical
importance from the perspective of theory of the mind in understanding
why preschoolers blur the distinction between fact and fiction is the
ability to attribute beliefs as a mental state. This is because although
“beliefs generally coincide with the state of the world,”28 they are
nonetheless internal and mental states that may, or may not, accord with
reality. Preschoolers, as seen in myriad “false belief” task experiments,
find it difficult to grasp that beliefs (or perceptions) are mental states
and not reality; thus a person may have false beliefs, i.e., beliefs that do
not accord with reality. In one common version of false belief tasks, for
example, children are told a story where Maxi places a chocolate in a
box x and goes away.29 In his absence his mother removes the chocolate
from box x and puts it in box y. The children are then asked to point
out the box where Maxi will look for the chocolate when he returns.
Preschoolers before the age of 5 will typically point to box y because
they cannot distinguish Maxi’s false belief (chocolate is in box x) from
their own belief (chocolate is in box y). Moreover, as alluded to above,
this inability to point out Maxi’s false belief is an indicator that the
preschoolers are not conscious of their own or others’ “beliefs.”30 Indeed
as a recent study has shown, it is not until the age of 70 months that
children consistently demonstrate competence in distinguishing between
factive (“know”) and non-factive verbs (“think” and “guess”), heralding
the maturation of their mind.31 Difficulty in grasping belief, and belief
as a mental state, which results in the fusing of belief and reality in their
experience is what makes preschoolers blur the distinction between
reality and perceptions or imaginations. In consequence, what to an older
person is fiction, imagination, or apparent (i.e., “belief”) is reality to a
preschooler, hence their magical world. Thus theory of the mind insights
27 Anna R. Mcalister and T. Bettina Cornwell, “Preschool Children’s Persuasion
Knowledge: The Contribution of Theory of the Mind,” Journal of Public Policy
and Marketing 28.2 (2009): 175–85.
28 Maria Rosaria Cadinu and Jeff Keisner, “Children’s Development of a Theory
of the Mind,” European Journal of Psychology of Education 15.2 (2000):
93– 111 (97).
29 Heinz Wimmer and Josef Perner, “Beliefs about Beliefs: Representation and
Constraining Function of Wrong Beliefs in Young Children’s Understanding of
Deception,” Cognition 13 (1983): 103–28.
30 Anika Fiebich, “Mindreading with ease? Fluency and Belief Reasoning in 4- to
5-year-olds,” Synthese 191.5 (2014), 929–44 (929–30).
31 Susanne Kristen-Antonow, Irina Jarvers, and Beate Sodian, “Preschoolers’
Developing Understanding of Factivity in Mental Verb Comprehension and its
Relation to First- and Second-order False Belief Understanding: A Longitudinal
Study,” Journal of Cognition and Development 20.3 (2019): 354–69.

are in harmony with Piaget’s insight on preschoolers’ ego-centric thinking
and also account for reasons why they struggle to mentally decentre and
take another person’s view.
When children get to school age, they transcend the limitations of
the four mental operations they had as preschoolers, and consequently
become concrete operational thinkers. The result of this is a marked
increase in their concrete thinking capacity. More precisely, they are now
able to classify people, objects and activities properly, and, thanks to
their development in theory of the mind, they are also able to decentre
mentally by observing and attributing beliefs, intentions and desires to
mental states of their own and others. Moreover their inferential ability
is no longer limited to the transductive kind alluded to above but is now
transitive and deductive, bringing about a proper linkage of cause and
effect. For these reasons they are capable of grasping deeper knowledge
of the world and can differentiate reality from fiction, thus moving away
from the fantastical world they had as preschoolers to a more accurate
picture of reality.
Before we consider the implications for evangelism that the
understanding of preschoolers’ cognitive status has, we need to consider
certain criticisms of Piaget’s studies on children’s cognitive abilities.
Our concern here is not with criticism of all things Piaget said, but with
criticism that is aimed at the stages he identified in children’s cognitive
abilities and their nature. This is because these are fundamental to
his insights and, crucially, what this article draws upon in discussing
preschoolers’ cognitive abilities. These criticisms of Piaget’s stages of
cognitive development and their nature are that, first, apart from the
first stage in the first two years of life, they are general, lacking in detail.
Secondly, there is concern that they do not account for what precipitates
movement or transition from one stage to another. Lastly, some argue that
Piaget’s stages fail to accommodate individual and cultural variations,
instead rendering them as uncritically universal and rigid.32 Nevertheless,
Piaget’s understanding that children’s cognitive abilities undergo definite
developments has hitherto not been discredited in child psychology
scholarship, that is to say, they have not been shown to be out of touch
with children’s cognitive realities. This is also the case with his insights on,
in principle, the cognitive characteristics of children in the various stages
he identified, i.e., sensori-motor, intuitive and operational. It is for this
32 I have drawn my summary of these criticism from Peter Sutherland, Cognitive
Development Today: Piaget and his Critics (London: Chapman, 1992); Lourenco, “,
“In Defense of Piaget’s Theory: A Reply to 10 Common Criticisms,” Psychological
Review 103.1 (1996): 143–64; David Henry Feldman, “Piaget’s Stages: The
Unfinished Symphony of Cognitive Development,” New Ideas in Psychology 22.3
(2004): 175–231.

reason that they continue to be applied today in discourse on children as
varied as children’s map-making,33 children’s development of operational
time,34 genetic epistemology,35 use of labels,36 perspectives on children’s
learning,37 and models of learning.38 It is for the same reason that I have
used Piaget to map out preschoolers’ cognitive abilities. With these
remarks, I am now in a position to offer my proposals on how the church
and parents can evangelise children in the light of their cognitive status.
3. Evangelising Preschoolers
We have described the cognitive status of preschoolers as one of concrete
thinking but whose capacities for concrete thinking are limited by their
inability to perform certain mental operations. We said that this makes
them incapable of a deeper knowledge of the world. Therefore, evangelism,
that is, gospel proclamation, cannot be a fully blown, and thus integrated,
explanation about Jesus. A full-blown gospel proclamation requires
communicating the gospel reasonably, which would invariably entail
explaining to preschoolers, for example, the nature of Jesus’ divinity and
the goal of Jesus’ coming to the world, the nature of his kingship and its
purpose, the meaning of his deeds, the reasons for his sacrificial death,
the significance of his resurrection, and the ends to be accomplished by
his return. Such reasonable explanations of the gospel require making
connections between various aspects of the gospel, for example between
Jesus’s coming and humanity’s situation, between his kingship and God’s
eternal home, between his sacrificial death and humanity’s condition,
between his kingship and his deeds, between his kingship and his divine
sonship, and between his resurrection and his words. These requirements
presume the cognitive ability for spotting causal linkages in the gospel and
33 E.g., Eugene Geist, “Let’s Make a Map: The Developmental Stages of Children’s
Mapmaking,” Young Children 71.2 (2016): 50–55.
34 E.g., Constance K. Kamii and Kelly A. Russell, “The Older of Two Trees:
Young Children’s Development of Operational Time,” Journal for Research in
Mathematics Education 41.1 (2010): 6–13.
35 E.g., D. Abrahamson , S. Shayan, A. Bakker, M. van der Schaaf, “Eye-Tracking
Piaget: Capturing the Emergence of Attentional Anchors in the Coordination of
Proportional Motor Action,” Human Development 58 (2015): 218–44.
36 E.g., Stephanie E. Miller, Stuart Marcovitch, and Janet J. Boseovski, “Young
Children’s Ability to Use Ordinal Labels in a Spatial Search Task,” Merrill-Palmer
Quarterly 61.3 (2015): 345–61.
37 E.g., Kaya Yilmaz, “The Cognitive Perspectives on Learning: Its Theoretical
Underpinnings and Implications for Classroom Practices,” Clearing House 84.5
(2011): 204–12.
38 E.g., Amy Perfors, “Piaget, Probability, Causality, and Contradiction,” Human
Development 59 (2016): 26–33.

integrating various pieces of information about the gospel, both of which
are beyond preschoolers’ capacities for concrete thinking.
I propose then that the evangelism of preschoolers through gospel
proclamation is limited to proclaiming simple gospel content. By this I
mean the proclamation of the gospel to preschoolers by way of singular
concrete explanations of the gospel to them, with few words, through
pertinent stories, illustrations, and memorable statements or sayings.
Singular concrete explanations of the gospel entail explaining only one
aspect of the gospel at a time without relating it to other gospel content
(or even necessarily anticipating explaining at a later date its relationship
to other gospel content). This singular gospel explanation to preschoolers
precludes any integrated understanding of the gospel. It also focuses on
the what? or who? or when?, or where? (events, places, descriptions,
naming, identifications, etc.), and not how? or why?, of the gospel. This
might include a key event in the life of Jesus, where Jesus was born, a
miracle he performed, a relationship he had, a concrete identity of his
such as Jesus the king, Jesus the healer, Jesus the miracle worker, etc. We
will call this type of evangelism of preschoolers simple explanatory gospel
proclamation. It has a counterpart in simple non-explanatory gospel
proclamation (i.e., ways that do not involve simple gospel explanations as
outlined above) which we consider below.
Evangelism of preschoolers through simple explanatory gospel
proclamation enables them to acquire knowledge of the gospel of the
declarative kind. By declarative knowledge I mean “knowledge that can
be declared, usually in words, through lectures, books, writing, verbal
exchange, braille, sign language, mathematical notation, and so on.”39
Correspondingly, declarative knowledge40 is explicit, i.e., the knower is
conscious that s/he has the knowledge and can articulate or communicate
it. On the other hand, simple non-explanatory gospel proclamation
enables preschoolers to acquire experiential knowledge of the gospel.
Experiential knowledge is not taught by any systematic instruction and
explanation but, rather, is acquired through exposure. Repeated exposure
to something engenders knowledge through imitation, internalisation,
imagination, and affection, and through intuition. For example, a
preschooler will not know the route to a neighbour’s house by studying a
map or taking instructions from parents; s/he will know the route to the
neighbour’s house through repeated accompanied journeys to the house.
This is akin to the ways in which preschoolers know and comprehend a
language. Therefore, experiential knowledge may not be articulable.
39 S. Farnham-Diggory, “Paradigms of Knowledge and Instruction,” Review of
Educational Research 64.3 (1994): 463–77 (468).
40 Also referred to as “propositional knowledge.”

The first evangelism of preschoolers through simple non-explanatory
gospel proclamation I propose, is through repeated exposure to the gospel
through simple gospel stories. Simple gospel stories would have a singular
focus with fewer words and characters as has been well done in some
children’s Bibles with usually Bible stories of about 25 words for 3 and
4 year preschoolers,41 and between 25 and 75 words for 5 and 6 year
preschoolers.42 We need to note here that although gospel stories should be
told intentionally to preschoolers for exposure purposes, preschoolers can
also pick up these stories if they capture their attention and are repeatedly
told in the context of adult conversation. In this sense, testimonies, or
personal stories of faith in Christ, in the context of home conversations
and in church can be avenues for exposure of preschoolers to gospel
stories. Since stories are by nature concrete, when simple gospel stories
are repeatedly heard by, told to, or dramatised for, preschoolers, they feed
into their imagination and also become part of its content, enabling them
to internalise the stories and acquire experiential gospel knowledge.
The second simple non-explanatory gospel proclamation in the
evangelism of preschoolers I wish to propose is through repeated exposure
to gospel symbols such as the cross, lamb, ship, fish, and Chi-Rho, and
to gospel rituals, if we may term them so, of Holy Communion, and
baptism. Repeated exposure to gospel symbols and rituals means that
non-proclamatory evangelism of preschoolers requires the participation of
preschoolers in Christian worship as a way of evangelism. Such repeated
exposure feeds into preschoolers’ imagination by which they internalise
the symbols and rituals to which they are exposed. Parents, Sunday School
teachers, and pastors, as noted by James Fowler cannot be in control
of preschoolers’ imagination and internalisation, but can engage with
both.43 Such an engagement is through appropriately answering, guiding,
or correcting preschoolers in response to the questions they raise and the
imaginations they express as a result of their internalisation of the gospel.
Going back to our analogy of language in understanding experiential
knowledge, this is the way that parents engage preschoolers when they
are learning a language.
When preschoolers are exposed to the gospel through simple nonexplanatory means, their subsequent imagination and internalisation of
the gospel is most likely to connect with their declarative knowledge of the
gospel acquired through simple explanatory gospel proclamation leading
41 E.g., Katin Juhl, The Carry Along Bible, illustrated by Jacob Kramer (Copenhagen:
Copenhagen Publishing House, 2014).
42 E.g., Carine Mackenzie, Little Hands Story Bible: Stories from the Old Testament
(Fearn, Ross-shire: Christian Focus, 2009).
43 James Fowler, Stages of Faith: The Psychology of Human Development and the
Quest for Meaning, rev. ed. (New York: Harper Collins, 2004), 132–33.

to a greater knowledge of the gospel. Thus preschoolers’ evangelism has a
greater impact when both ways are used.44
We conclude our discussion of the evangelism of preschoolers in the
light of their cognitive status with a critical point on the outcomes of the
evangelism of preschoolers from the perspective of worldview. The end
goal of the evangelism of preschoolers is not merely belief, or a verbal
profession of belief, in the gospel and therefore a conversion from a state
of “darkness” to a “light”, or from “blindness” to “seeing” or from the
“old” to the “new’, or from the kingdom of Satan to God’s Kingdom.
Rather, the expected outcome is one of Christian formation, forming the
preschooler’s worldview into a Christian one by virtue of it being heavily
infused by the gospel. This is because a preschoolers’ mental habitat is, as
already discussed, fantastical, making no differentiation between the real
or imagined, and so belief and unbelief are alien to their minds; indeed,
belief and unbelief are not a part of their mental posture. A preschooler
simply imbibes from, and reflects, the world s/he is exposed to and is
consequently formed by it in at least three dimensions: (i) Their world
perception, i.e., what they perceive of the world, how it is and why, how
it ought to be, the underlying moral/metaphysical order, etc.; (ii) their
self-perception and identity; and (iii) their values and attitudes. This is to
say that preschoolers’ exposure to the gospel is instrumental in forming
their worldview since these dimensions are basic to a worldview.45 Once
a preschooler’s worldview is formed, it remains an unrivalled force
throughout their lives by virtue of both its transformation later into
their root beliefs, and its enduring influence on their identity, attitudes,
and values.
When preschoolers become school-age children, at about the age of
seven, their increased thinking capacity, as discussed above, means that
they invariably begin to sort out the magical from the real in their inner
44 This said, we should note that evangelism which is informed by various human
elements such as cognitive capacities does not solely account for bringing people to
the knowledge of, and belief in, God and the Lord Jesus. God works by his Spirit
through evangelism to bring men, women, and children to himself. Evangelism,
therefore, should always be carried out with reference to God through obedience,
trust, anticipation, etc. When evangelism is viewed this way, then it should be
precisely because of reference to God that Christians should strive to evangelise in
ways informed by certain knowledge of human beings, in this case children, since
it is God who has designed them so according to his plans and purposes divine.
45 For more on this see Arthur F. Holmes, Contours of a Worldview (Grand Rapids:
Eerdmans, 1983); James H. Olthuis, “On Worldview,” CScR 14.2 (1985), 1–12;
Charles Taylor, Modern Social Imaginaries (Durham, NC: Duke University Press,
2004), 23–30; Robert Cummings Neville, “Worldviews,” AJTP 30.3 (2009), 233–
243; Katherine G. Schultz and James A. Swezey, “A Three-Dimensional Concept of
Worldview,” JRCE 22 (2013), 227–43.

world that hitherto has been undifferentiated. What then was part of their
inner world that cannot be observed or proven by ordinary human means
is either rejected as untrue, or embraced by faith as real. This sifting
the real from the imagined applies to the gospel as well, which then has
to be embraced by faith as true or otherwise rejected due to unbelief.
However, school-age children whose worldview was formed by the gospel
have, humanly speaking, a better chance to embrace it by faith and not
reject it in disbelief. This is because their Christian worldview provides a
hospitable environment for the preschooler to believe in the gospel once
they attain the age of discernment. At that age their gospel-informed
Christian worldview remains with them but is now reconstituted on the
basis of faith as a root belief about reality and the world.46
This conclusion could explain the convictions articulated by
Bushnell47 over a century ago (that would herald a turn in focus towards
Christian education as a form of evangelism)48 that if children are from
infancy exposed in a sustained way to the gospel, they have an increased
likelihood to have a relationship with God than would otherwise be the
case, and thereby precluding the need for a radical conversion later in
life. Such a conviction is not merely academic but one that some adult
believers, including myself, can identify with. During weekly testimony
hours at an evangelical theological institution in Africa where I once
taught, it was not uncommon to hear testimonies of conversions by some
students that had no point of conversion to mention but rather a journey
of faith in God and the Lord Jesus that began in childhood. Seen this
way, apparent conversions in such preschoolers later in their school-age,
teenage or adult lives need not be viewed as conversions per se but rather
as spiritual “awakenings” or “renewals” of their faith. What occurs can
be described as the “enthusiastic adoption of a belief system that had
not been taken seriously previously or that had been abandoned out of
scepticism, rebellion, or indifference,”49 or, we may add, out of a lack of
46 Via a different route, for a more varied ecclesial context, and not using the
language of evangelism and worldview, Yust gives proposals on nurturing children
into the faith and their intended outcomes that are very close to mine. See Karen-
Marie Yust, “Cultivating Christians: North American Family Cultures and
Religious Identity Formation,” International Journal for Children’s Spirituality
22.3–4 (2017): 260–73.
47 Horace Bushnell, Christian Nurture (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1915).
48 For brief discussion on this, see Sheeder, “Evangelism and Christian Education,”
349–58; Randolph Crump Miller, “Horace Bushnell: Prophet to America’s
Children,” PerkJ 32 (1979): 1–8; and Mark A. Maddix, “Christian Nurture and
Conversion: A Conversation between Horace Bushnell and John Wesley,” CEJ 9.2
(2012): 309–25.
49 David A. Snow and Richard Machelek, “The Sociology of Conversion,” Annual
Review of Sociology 10 (1984): 167–90 (169–70).

relevant teaching or engagement by churches and parents. Others, with
John Barker, prefer to call these awakenings “secondary conversions,”
where those who respond in faith to the proclamation of the gospel
are not strangers to it but are familiar with it having earlier either been
shaped by the gospel or accepted it, a situation that both brings about
and conditions their current awakening.50 Such an understanding also
means that the Christian life of a person evangelised as a preschooler
in this way is not viewed solely in its current state divorced from his/her
Christian formation.
4. Infant Baptism and Preschoolers’ Evangelism in Anglican
Churches
Evangelism of preschoolers in Anglican churches is implicit in the liturgy
for infant baptism. Indeed, if we understand our liturgies past and present
correctly, an undertaking is made to evangelise the baptised infant
subsequent to their baptism. Anglican churches’ prayer book liturgies
for infant baptism without exception point in various ways to three
things that are symbolised in baptism:51 forgiveness of sins, rebirth, and
becoming a member God’s family, the church. The post-baptismal state
is no less than the onset of Christian pilgrimage, the entry to Christian
faith and practice. For the baptised infant, the sequence is that evangelism
is carried out after his/her baptism in a process across their childhood
which results in their Christian formation rather than conversion.52 This
is because the infant’s post-baptismal state must be actualised in reality.
If there is no actualisation, which would be the case if the baptised infant
is not evangelised, then we would have a baptised person who does not
know God, the Lord Jesus, or God’s forgiveness—a baptised person who
50 John Barker, “Secondary Conversion and the Anthropology of Christianity in
Melanesia,” Archives de Sciences Sociales des Religion (2012): 67–87.
51 See for example The Church of Nigeria (Anglican Communion), The Book
of Common Prayer, rev. ed. (Dongshang Town: Nanjing Amity Printing, 2007),
158–67; Anglican Church of Kenya, Our Modern Service (Nairobi: Uzima, 2002),
34–41; Anglican Church of Southern Africa, An Anglican Prayer Book (London:
Collins, 1989), 380–87.
52 Since the liturgies for adult baptism are similar to the ones for infant baptism,
the same three things are believed to happen to an adult who is baptised, only that
unlike the infant an adult begins his/her Christian pilgrimage having believed in the
gospel. The sequence of events for the baptised adult prior to the onset of Christian
life is his/her evangelism, followed by repentance and conversion evidenced in his/
her profession of faith in God and the Lord Jesus, and lastly his/her baptism.

does not believe in the gospel, and is not a member of the household of
faith, the church.53
Anglican churches presume that the infant’s post-baptismal state
will be actualised by means of the infant’s believing parents, godparents/
sponsors, and the specific community of faith to which the child belongs.
This presumption is visible in the role of Christian nurture that parents
and godparents of the infant bind themselves to according to the liturgies
for infant baptism. However Anglican churches’ liturgies do not explicitly
provide the content to facilitate this actualisation nor offer guidelines on
how to go about it, leaving it incumbent on Anglican churches to work
these out. I suggest that the content of actualisation is the gospel. Given
that the gospel and belief in the same is integral to the forgiveness of sins,
to rebirth, and to membership of God’s family, the church, which are the
very things believed to happen through infant baptism, actualisation must
in principle be by way of gospel proclamation, i.e., through evangelism.
To put it plainly, baptism cannot be divorced from the gospel and the
positive outcomes of gospel proclamation. Anglican churches then by
virtue of their practice of infant baptism are committed to the evangelism
of their preschoolers by following-up their infant baptism with a
ministry of evangelism throughout their childhood. In consequence, my
proposals on how preschoolers’ evangelism in Anglican churches should
be conducted based on preschoolers’ cognitive status in relationship to
worldview formation are highly appropriate for preschoolers’ evangelism
in Anglican churches by virtue of potentially enabling the ends of their
infant baptisms.
In the BCP and in the prayer books of some African Anglican churches
such as the Anglican Church of Kenya a link is made between infant
baptism and confirmation on the basis of infants coming of age (“age
of reason”).54 However, the reason for this linkage and the relationship
between childhood and the age of reason to confirmation are not given,
once again leaving Anglican churches to work them out. My proposal
above for preschoolers’ evangelism in Anglican churches based on Piaget’s
childhood cognitive studies helps in making sense of this linkage and
relationship. As discussed earlier, these studies show that when children
get to school-age their cognitive status enters a new phase where, amongst
other things, reality and fantasy are now distinguished and thus faith and
53 I suspect that this need for actualisation upon those baptised as infants is the
reason some in Anglican Churches doubt the efficacy of infant baptism and do
not subscribe earnestly to it. When I served as an associate priest in an urban
Anglican parish there are those who preferred to bring their babies for dedication
as a substitute for baptism.
54 See Anglican Church of Kenya, Our Modern Service, 38; Church of the Province
of Uganda, Come and Worship rev. ed. (Kampala: Centenary, 2009), 32.

unbelief become part of their mental posture. These children can therefore
embrace the gospel which has been instrumental in the formation of their
Christian worldview, but from a position of understanding and belief,
and thus are able to profess it verbally. In other words, when an infant’s
Christian formation comes to completion in their school-age years, you
have a baptised person who believes in the gospel and is able to profess the
same publicly, thereby becoming a candidate for confirmation. This adds
to the friendliness of my proposals to Anglican practice of infant baptism.
5. Conclusion
Going by my wide experience of east and central African Anglican churches,
evangelism has been done consciously, consistently, and robustly in African
Anglican churches. Unfortunately, the same cannot be said of evangelism
of preschoolers. Indeed there are those who wait for preschoolers to be of
age before they evangelise them. Saying “then they will have to decide for
themselves whether to accept Jesus or not” is a common sentiment. The
liturgy for infant baptism which, as we pointed out, presumes subsequent
evangelism of those baptised is virtually ignored. Any inquiry of African
Anglican churches’ clergy and lay people reveals that their understanding
of infant baptism as laid down in the liturgy is de facto replaced by
understandings of infant baptism as a child naming ceremony, or a form
of child dedication, or even the blessing and protection of a child. In
some cases, some clergy and lay people have no understanding of what
infant baptism means and simply justify the practice as a required church
tradition. It is no wonder that it is not uncommon to hear the very priests
who baptise infants in African Anglican churches disparaging baptism
by telling their hearers that it is inconsequential in matters of salvation.
African Anglican churches are therefore under-prepared to carry out the
preschoolers’ evangelism proposed above. If they are to evangelise the
myriad preschoolers in their churches as I have proposed, and thereby
be in harmony with their liturgies of infant baptism, they must prioritise
and invest financial resources in theological childhood studies for training
their clergy and children’s ministers (Sunday School teachers).
Prioritising theological childhood education of clergy and children’s
ministers is a prerequisite for the kind of evangelism I propose because
clergy and those who minister to children must be knowledgeable,
from a theological perspective, on childhood matters, to appreciate
the appropriateness of such evangelism and support it. Such critical
knowledge is acquired via theological childhood studies. Childhood
studies concern themselves with manifold subjects on children which
range from their nature, development, spirituality, world and contexts, to
their rights, education, health, needs and wants, concerns, and questions.
Accordingly, theological childhood studies are theological studies focused

on children that draw critically from childhood studies for theological
reflection and discourse on children. Some theological studies focused on
children more directly address areas of children’s ministry by drawing
on childhood studies, and from the Bible and theology. Starting from
the 1990s literature on theological childhood studies has been on the
increase55 with two journals exclusively devoted to the subject.56 There
is currently a considerable amount of material to support the theological
education of clergy and children’s ministers in Anglican churches in Africa.
The Anglican Church of Uganda has taken a step in the right direction by
having theological childhood studies in Bishop Tucker School of Divinity
and Theology of Uganda Christian University’s Child Development and
Children’s Ministry programme at both Bachelor’s and Master’s level.
Church Army’s Africa theological college, Carlile College, based in
Nairobi which trains evangelists for the Anglican churches of east and
central Africa has also done the same in offering a diploma course in
Children and Family Ministries.
The other reason why theological childhood studies for clergy and
children’s ministers in African Anglican churches is a prerequisite for
the proposed evangelism of preschoolers has to do with its delivery. For
the proposed methods for the evangelism of preschoolers to be carried
out, Anglican churches need personnel who are not only skilled in child
pedagogy but who can also craft curricula and carefully choose the
most appropriate literature for such evangelism. With the objectives
of evangelising preschoolers through simple concrete explanations of
the gospel as well as simple non-explanatory gospel proclamations in
mind, I have to point out here that the content of such curricula would
in principle be based mostly on simple gospel stories offered repeatedly
to preschoolers over the course of their preschool. I venture here to
suggest, for a concrete example, that a curriculum could be drawn up
revolving around six groups of Jesus stories, namely, divinity, miracle
55 See Marcia J. Bunge, “The Child, Religion, and the Academy: Developing
Robust Theological and Religious Understandings of Children and Childhood,”
JR 84.4 (2006): 549–79; Adrian Thatcher, “Theology and Children: Towards a
Theology of Childhood,” Transformation 23.4 (2006): 194–99; Diana Wood, ed.,
The Church and Childhood, Studies in Church History 31 (Oxford: Blackwell,
1994); Pamela D. Couture, Seeing Children, Seeing God: A Practical Theology of
Children and Poverty (Nashville: Abingdon, 2000); Bonnie J. Miller-McLemore.
Let the Children Come: Reimagining Childhood from a Christian Perspective
(San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 2003); Kristine Henriksen Garroway, “Gendered or
Ungendered? The Perception of Children in Ancient Israel,” JNES 71.1 (2012):
95–114; Naomi Steinberg, The World of the Child in the Hebrew Bible (Sheffield:
Sheffield Phoenix, 2013).
56 Namely the International Journal of Children’s Spirituality and the Journal of
Childhood and Religion.

stories, passion, resurrection, ascension, and second coming stories. All
these groups of stories could be packaged in orderly sequence and offered
to preschoolers as a complete unit for three months (12 Sundays), four
times through the year. The curriculum would be offered to preschoolers
when they are 3 year olds and re-run yearly in their 4th up to their 7th
year but graded, i.e., adjusted per year to match the preschoolers’ agedependant memories, concentration spans, and life experiences. Such
adjustments would be in the number of words per story, as well as in the
various questions, puzzles, and songs. The adjustments would also be in
the audio, dramatical, visual, and musical choices as well as in the verbal
and kinaesthetic activities chosen to accompany the stories. Simple gospel
explanations that are limited to matters that deal with the who? what?
where? when? would accompany these stories and be graded as well.
I would like to give more concrete details on the kind of curriculum
that would be useful for preschoolers’ evangelism that I have proposed,
for example, on how the curriculum can be designed to also be useful to
parents and godparents at home, on how the curriculum can be linked to
the church’s major feasts, etc. However I have not designed my paper to
articulate a curriculum that could serve the evangelism of preschoolers in
African Anglican churches but to propose how such an evangelism can be
done in an initial step towards writing curricula. I have argued here that
African Anglican churches must invest in theological childhood studies to
develop such competencies amongst their clergy and children’s ministers.
PETER NYENDE is Associate Professor of New Testament and Head
of Biblical Studies at Bishop Tucker School of Divinity and Theology,
Uganda Christian University.