Background: The African eggplant (Solanum aethiopicum) is a nutritious traditional vegetable used in many African countries,
including Uganda and Nigeria. It is thought to have been domesticated in Africa from its wild relative, Solanum anguivi. S.
Received: 26 January 2019; Revised: 14 July 2019; Accepted: 24 August 2019
C⃝The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted reuse, distribution, and reproduction in any medium,
provided the original work is properly cited.

aethiopicum has been routinely used as a source of disease resistance genes for several Solanaceae crops, including Solanum
melongena. A lack of genomic resources has meant that breeding of S. aethiopicum has lagged behind other vegetable crops.
Results: We assembled a 1.02-Gb draft genome of S. aethiopicum, which contained predominantly repetitive sequences
(78.9%). We annotated 37,681 gene models, including 34,906 protein-coding genes. Expansion of disease resistance genes
was observed via 2 rounds of amplification of long terminal repeat retrotransposons, which may have occurred ∼1.25 and
3.5 million years ago, respectively. By resequencing 65 S. aethiopicum and S. anguivi genotypes, 18,614,838 single-nucleotide
polymorphisms were identified, of which 34,171 were located within disease resistance genes. Analysis of domestication
and demographic history revealed active selection for genes involved in drought tolerance in both “Gilo” and “Shum”
groups. A pan-genome of S. aethiopicum was assembled, containing 51,351 protein-coding genes; 7,069 of these genes were
missing from the reference genome. Conclusions: The genome sequence of S. aethiopicum enhances our understanding of
its biotic and abiotic resistance. The single-nucleotide polymorphisms identified are immediately available for use by
breeders. The information provided here will accelerate selection and breeding of the African eggplant, as well as other
crops within the Solanaceae family.
Keywords: Solanum aethiopicum; African eggplant; Solanum anguivi; LTR-Rs; biotic stress; drought tolerance