The study examined the entrepreneurial orientation and Access to Bank credit controlled by the
size of the firm among Metal Fabrication Small and Medium Enterprises; a Case of Mbale City
Council. The study was motivated by the dwindling low-rate uptake of access to bank credit
among Metal Fabrication SMEs in Mbale City Council. The objectives of the study were to
examine the influence of networking on access to bank credit among metal fabrication SMEs in
Mbale City Council, to determine the influence of innovativeness on access to bank credit among
metal fabrication SMEs in Mbale City Council, to assess the influence of risk-taking on access to
bank credit among metal fabrication SMEs in Mbale City Council. Three research question were
generated based on the objectives. The study adopted the credit rationing theory to conceptualize
the variables as used in the study. A cross sectional survey design was adopted where both
quantitative and qualitative data was collected. A sample of 129 Metal Fabrication SMEs were
determined using Krejcie & Morgan table out of a population of 300 SMEs was selected. Using a
simple random sampling 129 questionnaires were administered to collect quantitative data, only
129 questionnaires were filled and returned constituting a response rate of 76.33%. Qualitative
information was collected using an interview guide for triangulation purposes from SME owners,
Branch managers, relationship Manager (SMEs), and Chairperson of Mbale City Council metal
fabrication association, representative from Uganda development Bank using an interview guide
and selected using a purposive sampling method. Diagnostics tests were performed as a
prerequisite for the parametric analysis for example data was tested for normality and
multicollinearity. In the study, analysis was done at different levels first with descriptive
statistics and by a multiple regression analysis. The findings of the study revealed a positive
significant influence of networking on access to bank credit (Beta =0.390, P value =0.006), a
negative significant influence of innovativeness on access to bank credit (Beta =-0.228, P value
=0.008) and a negative significant influence of risk-taking on access to bank credit (Beta =-
0.218, P value =0.046). The study recommended that efforts should be made to ensure that these
metal fabrication SMEs should connect because networking provides avenues through which the
government can channel money such as the “Emyoga Scheme” introduced by His Excellence the
President of the Republic of Uganda Additionally, every SMEs should include innovativeness in
the organization’s core values. SMEs should work hand in hand with financial providers to
understand their level of risk appetite and develop a follow-back position in case of losses for
business continuity purposes for example taking insurance. Future study could be directed to
finding the moderating effect of financial characteristics between entrepreneurial orientation and
access to bank credit

Key words: Entrepreneurial orientation, Networking, Innovativeness, Risk-taking, firm
size, Access to bank credit and Small and Medium Enterprises

CHAPTER ONE