334
Copyright © 2016, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter  15
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-5225-0282-1.ch015
ABSTRACT
While consumerism seems to be on the rise in many societies, little attempt has been made to link con-
sumerism to unethical behavior and its antecedents namely work ethic and perceived unfairness. The 
purpose of this study is to compare female and male perceptions of work ethic, unethical behavior and 
consumerism, and use this as a basis to examine whether unethical behavior and its antecedents explain 
consumerism in an emerging market context where consumer protection is at a minimum. Based on a 
cross sectional survey research design, this study uses valid measures from previous studies to collect 
data from a systematic sample of students from a large private university, Findings indicate that women 
and male students do not differ much on most of the items on the three scales. Further the study finds 
a direct link between perceived unfairness, unethical behavior and consumerism, while work ethic and 
consumerism are mediated by unethical behavior. Implications for government and business organiza-
tions are discussed.
INTRODUCTION
Consumerism and consumption are central activities in many societies today (Shah, 2014), and in many 
nations consumption has moved beyond the basics of life to include luxury and other technological in-
novations that simplify life. A consumerist society is defined as one largely directed by the accumulation 
and consumption of material goods (O’Shaughnessy & O’ Shaughnnessy, 2002), with people in such 
societies thinking much of themselves and very little of others (Lee et al, 2009). It can be said in general 
that peoples’ consumption patterns and the purpose of this consumption influence how they extract 
resources, manufacture and market products and eventually produce pollution and waste (Shah, 2014). 
Hence along with consumerism are positive impacts as well as obvious negative effects like environmental 
Ethically Questionable Behavior 
and Consumerism in Uganda:
A Survey of University Students
Isaac Wasswa Katono
Uganda Christian University, Uganda

335
Ethically Questionable Behavior and Consumerism in Uganda
﻿
degradation. However the gist of the matter is: what factors influence consumerism? Extant marketing 
literature (Lee, Pant & Ali, 2009) postulates that unethical behavior in the market place gives rise to 
consumerism, while this unethical behavior is itself bred by a poor work ethic and perceived unfairness 
in the market place among other factors. Based on earlier workers like Ali and Wisniesk (2010) as well 
as Fukukawa and Ennew (2010), this study examines the link between antecedents to unethical behav-
ior (work ethic and perceived unfairness), and consumerism in Uganda using a sample of university 
students. The study seeks to address the key question “does ethically questionable behavior influence 
consumerism in the market place in this country?”
Marketing and Consumerism
Current marketing practices have been accused of creating a consumerist or materialistic society (Abela, 
2006), though other authors such as O’Shaughnessy and O’ Shaughnnessy (2002) provide a spirited dis-
course in defense of marketing. As stated above, consumerism is associated with many negative effects 
to individuals and society. To elaborate, consumerism is associated with reduced consumer well being, 
particularly in terms of home relationships and levels of happiness (Csikszentmihalyi, 2000) among 
other negative effects. Marketing theorists argue that there may be a causal link between materialism 
and well being, by suggesting that materialism involves a reversal of priorities by consumers giving up 
values and behaviors that tend to be associated with greater satisfaction, in favor of those associated with 
less satisfaction (Abela, 2006). Specifically Ahuvia and Wong (2002) posit that materialism prioritizes 
lower order needs over high order needs, resulting in lower levels of satisfaction. In support of this 
view, Burroughs and Rindfleisch (2002) contend that individualistic orientation of materialistic values 
conflicts with collective oriented values such as family or religion. Such a conflict ends up in tension, 
resulting in a reduced sense of well being. In further support of the relationship between marketing and 
the growth of materialism, it has been established that there exists a causal link between advertising and 
materialism, and several studies have associated TV watching and TV advertising with high levels of 
materialism among children (Kinsey, 1987).
On the other hand and at a national level, consumerism as an ideology that celebrates consumption 
and spending in a society with less production capacity (as is the case in many developing countries like 
Uganda), may constitute a threat to future development and strengthen the dependency on imports (Ali 
& Wisniesk, 2010). Consumerism in Uganda is evidenced in the central region where people sell their 
land indiscriminately to buy luxurious cars, expensive clothing, and expensive phones, build large houses, 
motorcycles and so on. As explained in the next section, two major antecedents of ethically questionable 
behavior that are not in short supply in Uganda, are a poor work ethic and perceived unfairness emanat-
ing from lack of a consumer protection policy/law in the country. These two variables could possibly be 
associated with the consumerist attitude currently reigning in this country.
Consumerism and Unethical Behavior
There is need for both marketers and buyers to be ethical in their conduct, for the efficient and effec-
tive running of the market place (Fullerton et al, 1996). Unethical behavior on the part of either of 
them disrupts the relationship and gives rise to exchanges that are both “unproductive and ineffective” 
(Morgan & Hunt, 1994). Ethical consumer behavior can be defined as “decision making purchases and 
other consumption experiences, which are affected by the consumers’ ethical concerns” (Cooper-Martin 

 
25 more pages are available in the full version of this document, which may
be purchased using the "Add to Cart" button on the product's webpage:
www.igi-global.com/chapter/ethically-questionable-behavior-and-
consumerism-in-uganda/154461?camid=4v1
Related Content
Determinants of User Engagement in Social Commerce
Youngkeun Choi (2019). International Journal of Customer Relationship Marketing and Management (pp.
43-56).
www.igi-global.com/article/determinants-of-user-engagement-in-social-
commerce/236058?camid=4v1a
The Globalization of the Art Market: A Cross-Cultural Perspective where Local Features meet
Global Circuits
Federica Codignola (2015). Analyzing the Cultural Diversity of Consumers in the Global Marketplace (pp.
82-100).
www.igi-global.com/chapter/the-globalization-of-the-art-market/130865?camid=4v1a
Identity-Based Consumer Behaviour, Self-Congruity, and Retailer-Consumer Relationships: A
Literature Review
Isabella Maggioni (2014). Handbook of Research on Retailer-Consumer Relationship Development (pp. 13-
26).
www.igi-global.com/chapter/identity-based-consumer-behaviour-self-congruity-and-retailer-
consumer-relationships/109680?camid=4v1a
Analyzing the Effectiveness of Customer Retention Strategies with Existing Customers in
Banking Industry
Niraj Kishore Chimote and Ankita Srivastava (2012). International Journal of Customer Relationship
Marketing and Management (pp. 1-14).
www.igi-global.com/article/analyzing-effectiveness-customer-retention-
strategies/69948?camid=4v1a
