1 
 
 
THE COST OF MOTORCYCLE ACCIDENTS IN UGANDA 
 
 
 By 
 
Richard Sebaggala 
Fred Matovu (PhD) 
Dan Ayebale (PhD) 
Vincent Kisenyi 
Mesharck Katusiimeh (PhD) 
 
 
 
 
October, 2014 
 
 
 
Acknowledgements 
We are grateful to CrossRoads and UKAID who financially and technically supported this 
research effort. Special thanks go to technical team at CrossRoads, reviewers, various 
institutions and all persons who supported this work in different capacities.   
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
Understanding the cost of the road traffic accidents (RTAs) has been of interest to many 
scholars and policy makers for a long time. In Uganda like many developing countries in 

2 
 
Africa, injuries due to motorcycle accidents represent a major but often neglected 
emerging public health problem and contribute significantly to the overall road traffic 
injuries. This research study therefore explored the costs of motorcycle accidents and 
the pain, grief and sufferings of the motorcycle accident victims using a multi-method 
approach. Unlike many studies on cost of accidents which use the traditional human 
capital approach, this study in addition to the human capital approach, applied the 
Willingness-to-pay (WTP) approach to estimate the cost of motorcycle accidents. WTP 
method was used to estimate the value that boda boda riders would pay for reducing 
the risk of loss of life based on Contingent Valuation (CV) method.  We extend the 
analysis to also explore the key coping mechanisms adopted by the Boda-boda riders 
amidst the challenges the riders face when they suffer motorcycle accidents.  
The data were  obtained from multiple sources, including a survey of 1600 boda boda 
cyclists in Kawempe and Central divisions in Kampala City, interviews with accident 
victims and their immediate family members,  traffic police records, hospitals and 
national statistics on selected economic aggregates. The results show that motorcycle 
accidents are associated with huge economic and non-economic burden borne by the 
accident victims and the society as a whole.  The study established that it costs 
approximately 7 million shillings (or 2800 USD) to treat a boda boda accident victim who 
is severely injured. Based on annual police statistics on motorcycle accidents for 2012; 
the Ugandan economy losses more than UGX 3 billion (1.2m USD) value of output due 
to days away from productive work as result of severe injuries and death.  Likewise, the 
cost of motorcycle repairs amounted to UGX 350 million (140,000 USD).   
 
The study also estimated the value of preventing motorcycle accidents.  The estimates 
show that on average boda boda riders are willing to pay Ug Shs 222,550 (89 USD) a 
year for a reduction in mortality risks associated with motorcycle accidents that translate 
into UGX 4.45 billion  (US$1.78m), the value of statistical life (VOSL). Overall, the 
combined economic burden of the motorycle accidents  (repairs, medical costs, lost 
output and imputed cost of  pain grief and suffering) were estimated to be approximately 
US$ 3.6 million annually. This cost is about 0.02% of Uganda’s GDP in 2013. The key 
policy implication of the study is that reducing motorcycle causalities and fatalities will 
reduce social and economic sufferings of victims, unlock growth and free resources for 
more productive use. The findings provide the cost-benefit analysis of any investment in 
areas that will promote the prevention, treatment, care and management of motorcycle 
accidents in Uganda.  

3 
 
Introduction  
Injuries due to motorcycle accidents represent a major but often neglected emerging 
public health problem in developing countries and contribute significantly to the overall 
road traffic injuries (Peden, 2004; Kobusingye, et al, 2001; 2002). Available evidence 
from annual crime reports shows that road safety in Uganda is poor and has 
deteriorated over the last 20 years. The increase in the rate of road accidents is mainly 
due to the growing number of vehicles and lack of appropriate road safety interventions. 
The number of people who die due to road traffic accidents has grown from 660 in 1991 
to 2,954 in 2010. According to Annual Crime and Traffic Road Safety Report, 2011, 17.3 
percent of deaths were due to motorcycle accidents.  Estimates from the World Health 
Organization show that by 2020, deaths from traffic accidents are projected to rank 
second to HIV/AIDs (WHO, 2005). 
 
The growth of hired/commercial motorcycles (commonly known as boda boda in 
Uganda) as a mode of transportation in Uganda has increased road safety challenges 
(Annual Traffic Report, 2011).  Statistics show that Kampala city alone is estimated to 
have between 50,000-80,000 boda boda cyclists and that two patients die on average 
every week as a result of boda boda accidents.  The national referral hospital (Mulago 
Hospital) alone receives between 10 and 20 victims of boda boda accidents daily. Boda 
boda business is a money-making activity involving many players; and given the rate of 
unemployment in Uganda, the number of boda boda motorcyclists is expected to 
increase so will the motorcycle accidents.   Evidence shows that as the number of 
motorcycles rises, the number of accidents, especially to motorcycle riders, will increase 
(Umar et al, 1995; Widyastuti, 2012). The empirical evidence elsewhere shows that the 
probability of a motorcyclist being injured in an accident is higher than that for car users 
(see Widyastuti and Bird, 2004).  The pain, grief, suffering and loss of life as well as the 
economic consequences of boda boda accidents can be huge for the individual victims, 
their families and the country at large, but are seldom estimated empirically.   
Notwithstanding the above, the continued increase in the number of boda boda 
accidents has created demand for necessary road safety improvements. However, 

4 
 
information and evidence on the costs of boda boda accidents such as the immediate 
hospitalization and rehabilitation costs and indirect costs to the society (e.g. opportunity 
cost in terms of lost labour and output; lost financial support to the families and relatives 
of the victims; costs in terms of disability and death of victims) have not been fully 
examined and this explains partly why interventions to prevent the problem are very few 
and largely adhoc in Uganda. There has been little effort to estimate the costs of boda 
boda accidents in Uganda. A recent study conducted by Makerere University College of 
Health Sciences and the department of Orthopaedics is the only available study on 
costs of boda boda accidents. The study revealed that at least 62.5% of the budget 
allocated to the directorate of Surgery at Mulago hospital is spent on victims of 
accidents involving boda boda and that the average cost of treating a boda boda victim 
with head injuries or broken limbs is about UGX 700,359 (or US$280) 1. However, this 
study does not provide a full scale and magnitude of the costs of boda boda accidents 
because it focuses on costs borne by the health system (Kigera et al, 2010). 
Government and other stakeholders need accurate information and evidence 
particularly on how much saving can be gained by implementing road safety 
improvements to address boda boda causalities. Anecdotal information and reporting of 
accidents by the media and police traffic department limits our understanding of the 
extent to traffic safety problem to design appropriate policy action.  Interventions for 
effective road injury prevention need to be based on data and objective information, not 
on anecdotal evidence. Therefore, there was a need for a comprehensive research 
study which estimates both direct and indirect costs of boda boda accidents in Uganda. 
The present study is the first of its kind to provide a comprehensive estimate of the 
costs of boda boda accidents using the widely used traditional human capital method 
and the willingness-to-Pay method.   
                                                          
1 The average exchange rate at the time of the study was 1US$ = UGX 2500 

5 
 
Study aims and objectives 
The main aim of the research study was to build evidence on the cost of motorcycle 
accidents in Uganda and provide the rationale for investing in national road safety 
programmes. The specific objectives of the study were:  
(i) To estimate the direct and indirect costs of motorcycle accidents 
(ii) To establish the pain, grief and suffering of motorcycle accident victims 
(iii) To draw policy recommendations for improving road safety in Uganda 
Methodology 
Interventions to improve road safety require information on the benefits of improved 
safety based on imputed values or valuation of human life. There are various 
techniques available to value road casualties and  these include: Gross Output method 
(Human Capital Approach), the Net Output method, the Life Insurance approach, the 
Court Awards approach (the amounts awarded by the Courts for compensation to 
survivors or surviving dependants in the case of a fatality), Implicit public sector 
valuation approach, the friction-cost approach (valuing  the cost involved in replacing 
the killed or injured person to restore the previous production level) and Willingness to 
pay method.  
 
The traditional method of valuation is the human capital method. This method involves 
estimating an ex-post sum of various identifiable costs, such as loss of work income and 
medical expenses minus the pain and suffering (Abelson, 2008). However, since the 
fundamental premise of welfare economics is that public policy decisions should reflect 
the preference of those who will be affected by them; willingness-to-pay approach has 
become conceptually more satisfactory way of measuring the costs of accidents 
(Abelson, 2008; Maier et al, 1989).  According to Widyastuti and Mulley (2005), the use 
of the human capital approach to estimate the cost of accidents alone is inappropriate 
and a combination of human approach and individual willingness to pay is 
recommended. Therefore, this study established the medical and repair costs and lost 

6 
 
output as a result of boda boda accidents, and what individuals are willing to pay for 
reduced risk of injury or death due to boda accidents. The use of the two approaches 
provides more value for estimating human cost.  
 
Studies by TRL (1995) and Silcock and TRL (2003) have concluded that human capital 
method should be supplemented with some human element which is very subjective. 
The subjective costs have been valued using the Willingness to Pay (WTP) method. 
The WTP measures by how much the concerned individuals are ready to pay in order to 
improve their safety and thus provide information on the extent of the need to promote 
an effective intervention to the affected community. 
 
Economic reasoning suggests that the missing price information associated with safety 
issues can only be substituted by the amount people are willing to pay for the respective 
“product”. The method evaluates how individuals value safety, rather than react to how 
much an accident might have costed them (Widyastuti, 2012). The WTP method is 
considered appropriate where there is need to pursue social welfare as a result of 
accident reduction (Jacobs et al., 2000); provides a practical of understanding the value 
the individuals or community places on road safety (Sakashita, et al, (2012); and a 
conceptually more satisfactory way of addressing the issue of accident loss (Maier et al, 
1989). Estimating the cost of boda boda accidents using the combination of gross 
output and individual willingness to pay methods provides a better value and offers 
policy recommendations that justify interventions to reduce road accidents in general 
and boda boda accidents in particular.  
 
However, given that the majority of boda boda riders come from poor backgrounds; the 
direct financial and opportunity costs of accidents are the tip of the iceberg in 
comparison to the pain, grief and suffering of those involved in boda boda accidents. In 
most of the studies using the human capital approach, a fixed percentage to the direct 
cost and loss of productivity has always been added to represent the pain, grief and 
suffering.  

7 
 
Willingness-To-Pay method (WTP)  
The value of individual life reflect what people would be willing to pay (or sacrifice) to 
obtain benefits or to avoid costs (Jones-Lee, 1989).  This ex-ante approach involves 
some assessment of risk and the willingness of individuals to commit resources in 
exchange for reducing this risk to an acceptable level. This trade-off between risk and 
economic resources, measured in terms of the marginal rate of substitution of wealth for 
risk of death or injury, accords well with the fundamental principle of social cost-benefit 
analysis that public sector allocative decisions should be based upon the preferences of 
those who will be affected by the decision concerned.   
 
WTP method was used to estimate the value that individuals would pay to avoid the 
intangible costs that result from injury in a motorcycle accident or death.  The 
implementation of the WTP is through a survey questionnaire and there are two 
methods of collecting data in order to estimate how much an individual would be willing 
to pay for a reduction in the risk of sustaining an accident. These are: the “Revealed 
Preferences” and the “Stated Preference” approaches. The State Preference technique 
is more appropriately used when the WTP information cannot be verified from the 
market and is considered superior because it is possible to ask questions directly about 
the trade-off between risk and money; and it is also possible to consider a wider and 
more systematic range of trade-offs than is available in the Revealed Preference 
approach (Widyastuti, 2012).  
 
Researchers implementing the Stated Preference technique have commonly used the 
Contingent valuation (CV) approach (Chaturabong, 2010). This approach was adopted 
in this current study.  The questionnaire was designed to determine the amount of 
money that each motorcycle user would pay to reduce the risk of loss of life from 
motorcycle accidents.  Data gathered on the number of accidents, number of severities 
of motorcyclist per each severity type (fatal, slight and serious) and demographic 
information for motorcycle deaths and injuries obtained from police reports were used to 
present a picture of the probability of casualty involved in the accident. The 

8 
 
questionnaire comprised of questions related to (a) the socioeconomic characteristics 
and household characteristics of motorcyclists; (b) the riding behavior and the risk-
taking behaviors of motorcycle users such as size of engine, helmet use,  experience of 
involving in the accident; and (c) the valuation questions which were designed to ask 
the respondents to provide the estimates of the relevant rates that they are willing to 
pay for a reduction in the probability of fatality and injury due to the boda boda 
accidents.  
 
In the design of CV questions, three scenarios were used to elicit respondents’ 
willingness-to-pay. In each scenario both open-ended and closed-ended questions were 
used. The first scenario is to evaluate the WTP of respondents in their own risk of 
death, the second scenario is to evaluate the WTP to reduce the risk of severe injury, 
and the third scenario is to evaluate the WTP of respondents to participate in proposed 
Kampala city authority interventions to streamline boda boda industry and reduce 
accidents. According to Chaturabong et al, (2010), for the closed-ended question (also 
referred to as a “dichotomous choice” or “referendum” question), the respondent is 
asked whether he or she is willing to pay a specified amount of money presented as the 
value of the risk reduction. The respondent is expected to answer “yes” or “no.”  For the 
opened-ended question, the respondents is  asked to state the maximum amount that 
he or she is willing to pay for the good that is being valued (in this case, accident risk 
reduction). 
 
 
First Scenario: Risk of Fatality  
In the first scenario, the respondents were told that it is estimated that in Uganda , an 
average of 10 out of 100,000 people die as result of road accidents in  a year. In the 
closed-ended question, the respondents were asked:  “Are you willing to pay a certain 
amount of money to reduce the fatality risk from 10 to 5 deaths in every 100,000 people 
or 50% reduction in fatality risk?” The respondent then answered “yes” or no”. In the 
open-ended question, the respondents were simply asked “How much they are willing to 

9 
 
pay to reduce fatality risk from 10 to 5 deaths in every 100,000 people or 50% reduction 
in fatality risk”. 
 
Second Scenario: Risk of Severe Injury  
In the second scenario, the respondents were asked to imagine that they have to wear 
the helmet while riding motorcycle. The cost of helmet is 50,0002 Uganda shilling per 
helmet, the probability to have severe injury due to the motorcycle accident is 
10/100,000 each year. 
 
In the closed-ended question, the respondent were asked: “Are you willing to pay 
50,000 shillings to buy a helmet which can reduce the risk of severe injury from 10 to 3 
severe injured people in every 100,000 people or reduction in risk of severe injury by 
70%?” The respondent then answered “yes” or no. The second question asked if 
respondents are willing to pay for the Helmet if the price is increased- over a range of 
price figures up to the average maximum price derived from the pilot.”  
 
 
Third Scenario: Boda boda streamlining program by KCCA  
As earlier pointed out, KCCA has planned to streamline the boda boda industry through 
a number of efforts that include registration of boda boda riders in city, training of riders, 
issuing operational permits, supply reflector jackets and helmets, gazzetting stages and 
introduction of wardens, among others.  Out of these proposed interventions, we 
considered two options: (i) supply of reflector jackets and helmets and (ii) training. This 
is because these interventions are directly related to reducing accidents.  The closed 
ended question was: If it costs Uganda shillings 100,0003 (and higher price ranges) to 
get a reflector jacket and helmet (or training) would you be willing to pay this amount to 
reduce by half the number of boda boda accidents and injury each year in Kampala?  
The second question was: “What is the maximum amount of money would you pay to 
                                                          
2 The average cost of a helmet  
3 The range of actual costs were established from the market and KCCA  

10 
 
get a reflector jacket and helmet (or training) to reduce by half the number of boda boda 
accidents and injury each year in Kampala? 
 
According to Krupnick et al, (2002), many contingent valuation (CV) studies fail to pass 
the test of internal and external validity because of three types of problems: (1) 
rrespondents may not understand the risk changes they are asked to value; (2) 
respondents may not believe that the risk changes apply to themselves; and (3) 
respondents may lack experience in trading money for quantitative risk changes or lack 
the realization that they engage in this activity. These pitfalls are challenging because of 
the low level of education of the respondents, and our approach to dealing with the 
problem was to explain to respondents using real examples about probabilities and risk 
reductions during contingent valuation survey. Evidence shows that a brief training of 
the respondents in the survey regarding probability, risk, and risk changes enables the 
respondents to process risk information better and thus become more elaborate about 
their preferences for risk reduction (Mahmud, 2005). This fact was established during 
pre-test of the survey instruments and was highly emphasized during data collection. 
 
In the CV questionnaire, we exposed the concepts of probability of different events 
occurring, risks, and implications of risk changes such as flipping a coin, to determine 
which team starts a football match, and buying a lottery ticket as examples to introduce 
the concept of probabilities to the respondents. Mortality risk was discussed using the 
example of risk of dying from traffic accidents. The respondents were asked test 
questions after each example.  If the respondent got the answer right, then the 
enumerator would proceed to WTP questions otherwise the process was repeated until 
the respondent got it right.  
 
Computation of Value of Statistical Life  
The aim of using the willingness to pay approach described above was to estimate the 
boda boda rider’s marginal rate of substitution (MRS) between money and the reduction 
of risk of being killed in a boda boda accident. Therefore to  compute  the  value  of  

11 
 
statistical  life  (VOSL)  and  its  covariates,  we  apply  similar  approach as Maier et al, 
(1989).  If we denote the i-th boda boda rider’s marginal rate of substitution byMRSi .  
 
Then the estimate for MRSi  = 
5
000
,
100
000
,
100
/
5
b
b
i
i
=
 
 
For example, in the study, boda boda riders were asked their willingness to pay to 
reduce the fatality risk from 10 to 5 deaths in every 100,000 people or 50% reduction in 
fatality risk and if the answer is bi , then the marginal rate of substitution can be 
estimated. In a population of N boda boda riders, the average of MRS (∑
i
i N
MRS
1 ) is 
interpreted as the willingness to pay for a risk reduction which reduces the expected 
number of the deaths by 1(5). This is referred to as the Value of Statistical Life (VOSL) 
or the marginal value of safety (MVS). Based on individual evaluations, we examined 
the influence of socioeconomic characteristics of rider and different attributes (age, 
education, rider’s experience, marital status, monthly income, motorcycle ownership, 
number of dependents, ever experienced an accident).  In the estimating the regression 
model, we adopted log-linear model (where MVS is in logs) specification over linear 
specification with the help of the Box-cox test4. 
 
Computation of lost output/ productivity 
Lost output/productivity refers to the losses suffered by the country as a result of the 
loss of productive capacity of people affected by motorcycle accidents. The total 
average lost output for a fatal motorcycle accident is the sum of each future year’s lost 
output, which was estimated based on the following formula adopted from ( Anh et al, 
2005): 
                                                          
4 Box Cox = N/2*log (RSS
largest/RSS
smallest) ~ χ
2
 .    If estimated value exceeds critical value (from tables 
Chi-squared at 5% level with 1 degree of freedom is 3.84) reject the null hypothesis that the models are 
the same (ie there is a significantly different in terms of goodness of fit). 

12 
 
 
Lost output (fatality) =
)
(
(
)
∑
=
+
+
N
i
i
r
i
g
W
1
1
1
 
Where  
W= average yearly per capita gross domestic product  
r= discount rate  
g= growth rate of the economy  
i= average number of years of lost output per fatal accident 
 
In the study, we included both the average and median age of victims in fatal accidents 
for better information estimated at 35 and 28 years respectively5. The average loss of 
productive years is computed based on a retirement age of 60 years. Hence, the 
average number of years foregone by a fatal motorcycle accident is 25 and 32 
respectively. The average GDP per capita is 1.4 m Uganda shillings ($558) in 2013. The 
average growth rate of the economy for the last 10 years is 7%. Therefore, the g 
considered in this study is 7%. The discount rate (r) considered is 12% based on prime 
Interest rates in Uganda (Central Bank Rate).  The N is 571, based on the number 
motorcyclists who were reported dead by the police in 2011/2012 (Annual Police 
Report, 2012). 
 
The table 1.1 summarizes the cost components that were computed under the human 
capital approach/Gross Output Method.  
Table 1.1: Cost components of human capital approach 
Component of 
costs 
Data requirements
Data sources
Estimation
Hospital /Medical 
costs 
-Hospitalization 
days 
(serious 
and 
slight 
injuries); daily hospital 
costs for a serious 
-Hospital 
medical 
records 
-Survey data 
(
) GP
HC
DST
MC
i
i
i
i
+
=
*
 
Where: 
MCi is medical cost of  a 
serious or slight injury 
                                                          
5 These figures were obtained from Mulago hospital data base of people who died as a result boda boda accidents.  

13 
 
and slight causalities 
and; 
and 
general 
practitioner costs for 
serious 
and 
slight 
causalities. 
 
causality; 
DSTi is duration of stay, (days 
of hospitalization) for injury 
causality 
HCi is daily hospital costs for 
injury causality; and GPi is 
general practitioner costs for 
injury causality. 
Lost 
output/productivity
Fatal causalities and 
permanent 
disabilities 
-Average age of fatal 
cases 
-Average age of 
retirement 
-Average income  
(monthly earnings) 
-Hospital and 
medical 
records from 
health 
facilities 
-Police traffic 
department 
-Survey data 
Lost labor output of fatalities 
and 
permanent 
disabilities 
were computed over the rest of 
their 
expected 
productive 
working life and discounted to 
an equivalent present value. 
 
 
 
Serious and slight 
causality 
-Time lost due to 
serious and slight 
injury causality 
 
Calculated as the average daily 
wage rate of each person 
involved in the crash, multiplied 
by the number of days off work, 
and summing up for all the 
people involved in the crash.  
Motorcycle 
damage 
-Motorcycle damage 
cost 
 
-Survey data 
Calculated as the average cost 
of motorcycle repairs multiplied 
by the number of motorcycles 
involved in the boda boda 
accidents. 
 
Qualitative data collection 
In order to establish the pain, grief and suffering of boda boda accident victims, in-depth 
interviews were conducted. In-depth interviews were conducted with victims of boda 
boda accidents identified through the division chairpersons and where possible from 
Mulago hospital which has reasonable number of boda boda accident victims.  The in-
depth interviews elicited rich descriptions of the experiences of the victims. This method 
provided holistic data that depict systemic influences and effects of these accidents, the 
constraints and opportunities of the victims and how they think and act towards the 
phenomenon under study. In this study, the common threads were victims of boda boda 
accidents with permanent disabilities and serious injuries. Standard procedures for 
conducting key informant interviews were followed.  

14 
 
Data sources 
The study adopted a multi-approach method to estimate the costs of motorcycle 
accidents. Therefore,  data used in estimating the direct and indirect costs of motorcycle 
accidents and the pain, grief and sufferings of the motorcycle accident victims were 
obtained from multiple sources, including a survey of 1600 boda boda cyclists in 
Kawempe and Central divisions in Kampala City, traffic police records, hospitals and 
national statistics on selected economic aggregates. The boda boda cyclists who 
participated in the survey were randomly selected from boda boda stages with the help 
of stage boda boda chairpersons. In order to establish the pain, grief and suffering of 
boda boda accident victims, in-depth interviews were also conducted with victims of 
boda boda accidents and their immediate family members. 
 
 

15 
 
Descriptive findings 
A total of 1600 respondents were interviewed in this study. The respondents were 
hired/commercial motorcycle users (boda boda riders) who work in Kampala City.  
Tables 1.2 show the socio-economic characteristics of boda boda cyclists. Although 
many people view boda boda business as an extremely odd job and implies that only 
the less educated and less significant section of the people are the ones engaged in it, 
our survey results reveals that more than 50% of the boda boda riders had received 
secondary education and higher; 83% married, 79.1 previously employed, 62.8% relying 
on boda boda business, nothing else; and 73% own the motorcycles they ride. 
Table 1.2: Socio-economic characteristics boda boda cyclists 
Characteristics  
Frequency(n=1600)  
Percent  
Education 
No education 
83 
5.2 
Primary education 
712 
44.5 
Secondary education 
763 
47.7  
Post secondary 
42 
2.6  
Marital status 
Single  
251 
15.7  
Married  
1,334 
83.4  
Divorced/separated  
15 
0.9  
Previous employment status 
Employed  
1,265  
79.1  
Additional sources of income  
Nothing else 
1,004 
62.8 
Farming  
214 
13.4 
salaried employment 
27 
1.7 
Other 
282 
17.6 
Casual workers (building/driving)  
73 
4.6 
Motorcycle ownership
self fully paid 
839 
52.4 
self on loan 
328 
20.5 
Contracted 
426 
26.6 
Others 
7 
0.44 
 

16 
 
 
The results in table1.3 shows that boda boda riders on average earn more than the 
average monthly income of a Ugandan from all sources standing at UGX 303,700 
according to Uganda Bureau of Statistics Household Survey, 2009/2010. For instance 
the average daily and weekly income of boda boda cyclist in Kampala is 22, 237 and 
131, 574 Uganda shillings respectively.  According to estimates of the 2012 statistical 
abstract  based on the Household consumption expenditure data of Uganda Bureau of 
statistics, about 50% of the richest households in Kampala spent at least Shs. 
475,500/= per month on consumption as of financial  year  2009/10  (in  2005/06  
constant  prices). Therefore, putting these figures into perspective of the boda boda 
rider’s incomes per month; it implies that the boda boda riders are among the richest 
income earners in Uganda. What is not clear is whether the boda boda riders know this 
fact because it has bearing on their spending behavior in particular and attitude to road 
safety in general. 
 
The table also shows that average age of the boda boda riders is 30 years. This implies 
that the majority of boda boda riders are the young population of Uganda. In respect to 
the number of dependants and experience with boda boda business, it is evident in 
table 4.2 that the average number of dependents per cyclist is 5.5 and rider’s 
experience of 5.8 years. One can infer from the rider’s experience result and the fact 
that the majority of riders had been previously employed (79%) and focused on boda 
boda business alone (63%; that boda boda riders are not mainly in the boda boda 
occupation because of economic hardship and high rate of unemployment but rather out 
of their objective choice like other people are in their other occupations. This implies 
that boda boda riders do appreciate and love their occupation and for purposes of the 
safety, they will be willing to accept any change that improves their work and welfare. 

17 
 
 
 
Table 1.3:   Descriptive statistics 
Variable 
Obs 
Mean 
Std. Dev. 
Min 
Max 
Daily income 
1,600 
22,236.9 
7,701 
5,000 
60,000 
Weekly income 
1,600 
131,573.8
47,047 
10,000 
420,000 
Age  (years) 
1,600 
30.3 
6.1 
17 
65 
Number of dependents 
1,549 
5.5 
3.2 
1 
30 
Rider’s experience 
1,600 
5.8 
3.7 
0.08 
24 
 
Incidence and severity of motorcycle accidents 
Out of 1600 motorcycle riders who participated in the survey, 55.1% of boda boda riders 
had experience at least an accident.  Figure 1 shows that 34.2% of the riders had 
experienced more than one accident in their life time as boda boda riders. The 
respondents were further asked whether they know any of their friends or associates 
who have been involved in a motorcycle accident that resulted in an injury. More than 
96% of the respondents responded in the affirmative.  These figures indicate that 
majority of the boda boda riders get involved in motorcycle accidents that results into 
injury.    
 

18 
 
 
 
 
Severity of physcial injuries 
Boda boda riders who reported to have been involved in motorcycle accidents where 
asked to indicate the level of physical injuries sustained and whether  the rider was 
wearing a helmet or not. The severity of physical injuries  sustained was classfied  
based on four categories. No injury meant the rider did not visit a health facility; minor 
injuries for those who visited the health facility but not hospitalised nor had any 
breakage or scratch; moderate injuries for those who visited healthy facilities and had 
some breakage or needed aftercare; and serious injuries for those who had been 
hopsitalised at least one day.  
 
 

19 
 
 
 
The results presented in figure 3 above show that 44.1% of boda boda riders who had 
experienced accidents reported that the accidents resulted into serious injuries requiring 
them to be hospitalised at least one day. In economic sense, this implies that most of 
the motorcycle accidents have economic repurcusions on the riders in form of medical 
expenses and days away from work. In the figure 4, the total number of days away from 
work are presented. Figure 4 shows that on average boda boda riders spend 
approximately one and half months away from work due to injuries sustatined from 
accidents.   

20 
 
 
 
Helmet use and severity of injuries 
The use of the helmets has been established as one of the effective ways of protecting 
motorcyclist from head  injuries  and  fatalities  resulting  from  motorcycle  crashes.  It is 
common in Uganda, to find motorcyclist with helmets but not using them. Therefore, in 
this study, riders who reported accidents where asked whether they had used a helmet.  
Out of the 882 boda boda cyclist who had reported involvement in any motorcycle 
accidents, more than 80% had used a helmet at the time of accident (figure 5).  
 

21 
 
 
 
 
In figure 6, we compared the level of severity of physical injuries sustained and helmet 
use. The results depict that the number of boda boda riders who had helmets reported 
less severe injuries. However, we did not find significant differences in the number days 
away from work as results of severe injuries between the helmet users and non users.  
 
 

22 
 
Rider’s perception on the causes of motorcycle accidents 
A total of 1600 respondents to the questionnaire listed what they considered to be the 
main causes of fatal motorcycle accidents. Altogether, their responses led to a list of 
many causes that were categorized into seven broad categories. These categories are 
alcohol/drug abuse, reckless/bad driving, over speeding, bad roads, overloading and 
others.  Figure 7 below presents the percentage responses. Reckless driving (61.3%) 
and over speeding (13%) were the most common cause of motorcycle accidents given 
by the respondents. This implies that the risky behavior of the boda boda riders is 
reported to be responsible for the majority of fatal motorcycle accidents in Kampala. 
Bad roads (slippery surface, pot holes, bends etc) and alcohol/drug abuse were 
mentioned by 12% and 7% of the respondents respectively as one of the major causes 
of fatal motorcycle accidents in Kampala. 
 
 
 
Respondents were also asked to indicate the percentage contribution of the various 
factors in the crashes involving boda boda riders in the last year. The findings are 
presented in figure 8 below.  In the figure, it is also evident that the majority of riders put 
blame on the reckless riding and speeding as the major factors responsible for serious 

23 
 
motorcycle accidents. However, the figure also shows that drink riding, inexperience on 
the road and poor road conditions on average contributed more than 50% of the serious 
crashes involving boda boda riders in Kampala.  Overloading and rider’s fatigue were 
on average blamed for causing 38% and 31% of the serious crashes involving boda 
boda riders. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nonetheless, riders where asked the category of the road users responsible for 
motorcycle accidents. The following figure 9 depicts who to blame for motorcycle 
accidents in Kampala. The majority of the riders (58.4%) thought that it is themselves 
who were primarily to blame for accidents involving motorcycles. Commuter taxis, other 
vehicles, and poor roads were also blamed for the significant number of motorcycle 
accidents. 
 

24 
 
 
 
 
 
Finally, six types of accidents were listed and the boda boda riders were asked to 
choose what  they thought motorcyclists were most at risk at.  The results shown in 
Figure 10 reflect a strong opinion that most motorcyclist are at risk of being hit while 
overtaking other road users. This implies that boda boda riders are especially 
vulnerable to collisions when overtaking other roads users .  About to 20% of 
respondents indicated being vulnerable to being hit from behind by other road users and 
collisions with right-turning vehicles. ,.  Approximately 10% of riders regarded collisions 
with left turners as being a particularly risky manoeuvre. Few boda boda riders regarded 
loss of control and overshooting bends as a major cause of accidents experienced by 
motorcyclist.  
 

25 
 
 
 
Empirical findings 
This part presents the cost components  of motorcycle accident in Uganda. The cost 
components are estimated into two  groups: tangible costs and intangible costs. The 
study computed the cost of treatment (medical expenses), repair costs lost output due 
severe and fatality, value of statistical life based willingness to pay approach and pain, 
grief and suffering. 
Medical costs of motorcycle accidents 
Although medical costs constitute only a small  proportion of the total costs of 
motorcycle accidents,  the medical costs consitute the first and most tangible economic 
burden experienced  by the victim and the immediate family members and friends. The 
figures in table 1.4 presents the total medical cost based on data estimates from the 
survey and mulago hospital. The results shows that the medical costs per cyclist who is 

26 
 
seriously injured translate into  7,977135 Uganda Shiilings.  If we consider the the data 
from Uganda Police department between  January-December, 2012  in which 3043 
motorcyclists were reported to have been seriously injured as a result of motorcycle 
accidents in Uganda, this translates into  24,274,423,022 shilllings, apprpximately 24 
billion Uganda shillings.   
Table 1.4: Medical cost of boda boda accidents 
Components
Description 
Amounts/
days 
Total medical 
cost 
(DST*HS)+GP in 
Ugshs per cyclist
DST 
 
 
Duration of days from work as result of 
injury/days of hospitalization (obtained 
from the survey) 
46.6 
                    
HS 
 
Hospital cost for injury causality (average 
treatment cost of injury obtained from 
survey) 
156,154 
GP 
General 
practitioner 
costs 
for 
injury 
causality (obtained from Mulago study and 
represent the average  cost to maintain a 
boda boda patient 
700,359 
Total 
 
7,977,135.40 
If consider the total number persons who were 
seriously injured as a result of motorcycle  accidents 
between January-December 2012 based on Police 
Data 
24,274,423,022 
Source: Survey, Police Traffic Department, and Mulago study 
 
Nevertheless, for better information even when we consider slightly lower estimates 
from mulago hospital study by Kigera et al (2010) of  56,740 Ug shs and 8.3 days as the 
average cost of maintaining a patient in wards and hospitalization days respectively, 
medical cost of motorcycle accidents  both to the individual and the country as whole is 
substantial as indicated in table 1.5 below. 

27 
 
Table 1.5 Medical cost of boda boda accidents 
Components
Description
Amounts/days
Total medical 
cost 
(DST*HS)+GP 
in Ugshs per 
cyclist 
DST 
Days of hospitalization  
8.3 
                    
HS 
Average cost of maintaining  a patient in 
wards  
56,740 
GP 
General practitioner costs for injury 
causality (obtained from Mulago study 
and represent the average  cost to 
maintain a boda boda patient 
700,359 
Total 
 
1,171,301 
If consider the total number persons who were seriously 
injured as a result of motorcycle  accidents between 
January-December 2012 based on Police Data 
3,534,268,943 
Source: Survey, Police Traffic Department, and Mulago study 
 
Lost output/productivity 
Analysis of the survey data reveals that an estimated 389 boda boda riders were away 
from work due to serious injuries from motorcycle accidents, amounting to an average 
of 46.6 lost days of work (Table 1.6). Valuing this missed time at the workers’ actual 
daily incomes, an estimated 403 million shillings of economic output was lost due to 
time off from productive activities. Using Police data in 2012 which reported 3,043 
motorcycle accidents with serious injuries and based on average number days away 
from work and average daily income from the survey, it is evident in the Table 3.5 that 
over 3 billion shillings of economic output was lost in 2012.   
 
In addition, computation of the lost output due to premature death from motorcycle 
accidents was 446,963 per cyclist, translating into 255,216,071 Uganda shillings in 
2012, if we consider the number of persons killed as results of motorcycle accidents in 
January-December 2012 and average of age death at 35.  The computation of 
economic loss based on median age 28 still presents a huge economic loss to the 

28 
 
nation amounting to 185,382,316 Uganda shillings. These findings  imply  that 
prevention of fatality from motorcycle accidents and disability from severe injuries could 
have significant  economic payoff.  
Table 1.6: Lost output due serious motorcycle accidents and fatality 
Lost productivity due to serious motorcycle injury 
  
Number of days 
away from work 
due serious injury 
from accidents 
(average) 
Average 
daily 
income 
Number of 
people 
involved 
Total cost 
(Ughs) 
Study sample 
46.6 
22237 
389 
403,098,994
Police data 
2012 
46.6 
22237 
3,043 
3,153,291,101
Lost productivity due to fatality motorcycle accidents 
  
average GDP per 
capita  (W) 
(1+g)i
(1+r)i
Total cost 
(Ughs)  
W((1+g)I 
/(1+r)i) 
Average age 
1,400,000 
(1+0.07)^25 
(1+0.12)^25 
                          
446,963  
Median age 
1,400,000 
(1+0.07)^32 
(1+0.12)^32 
                          
324,663  
Based on Police data 2012 where 571 persons died as result of motorcycle 
accidents =N 
Average age 
              Lost output=  
)
(
(
)
∑
=
+
+
N
i
i
r
i
g
W
1
1
1
 
                    
255,216,071  
Median age 
                    
185,382,316  
Source: Survey, Police Traffic Department, Mulago Hospital and Ministry of Finance, 
Planning and Economic Development 
 
 
Repair costs 
In the survey we established the cost of repairs for those respondents who experienced 
motorcycle accidents. Results in table 1.7 shows that on average boda boda riders 
spend three times their daily incomes on motorcycle repairs (79,524 Ugshs). However, 

29 
 
the average costs for severe injuries were slightly higher (115098 Ugshs) implying that 
the costs of motorcycle repair rises with severity of the accident. Therefore, a total of 70 
and 44 million shillings on average was incurred as cost of repairs for overall accident 
victims and those who reported severe physical injuries respectively. Estimating the 
repairs costs based on 3043 severe motorcycle accidents reported by Police data in 
2012, the country lost approximately 350 million shillings in repair costs. 
Table 1.7: Repair costs due motorcycle accidents 
Variable 
Number 
Mean 
Std Deviation 
Total cost 
Repair 
costs 
882 accidents 
victims  
79,524 
129,744.70 
70,140,168
Repair 
costs 
389 severe 
injury victims  
115097.7 
161329.3 
44,773,005
 Source: Survey results  
 
WIllingess to pay  (WTP) for fatality reduction 
In any attempt  to  value  the  impact  of  any  policy   on  society, reserchers  measures   
peoples’  strength  of  preference  for  safety  initiatives  using the  WTP  approach and 
compute the VOSL. The VOSL should be thought of as convenient way to summarize 
the value of small reductions in mortality risks. This is what economist refer to as 
monetary value of reducing  mortarity risks, commonly called “value of life”. The 
expression “value of life” is an unfortunate reduced form of the value of statistical life 
(VOSL). Alternative terms for VOSL are value per ststistical life; value per life saved; 
and value of prevented fatality.  The VSL does not measure what an individual is willing 
to pay to avoid death with certainty. It measures the willingness to pay for a very small 
change in risk. To  understand the VOSL concept and our computations, the highlight 
below demonstrate the concept and how we arrived at the figures presented in table 3.7 
with an example: 

30 
 
Suppose that in City composed of 100,000 identical individuals (in this case motorcycle 
riders in Kampala), there is an investment project that will make the city's roads safer. 
However, it is known based on Police Data that on average 10 motorcyclists die every 
year on these roads, and the project is expected to reduce from 10 to 5 the number of 
expected fatalities per year. Ths implies that  the annual risk of dying due motorcycle 
accident is 10 in 100,000 and the anticipated project or intervention would reduce this 
number from 10 to 5 in 100,000. In statistical sense, this means that the project or any 
safety intervention  would reduce the annual risk of dying from motorcycle accidents by 
0.0005 (5/100,000). In a population of 100,000, any safety intervention is expected, in a 
statistical sense, to result in 5 fewer death from motorcycle accidents each year. 
Suppose now that each member of the city (in this case a boda rider) is willing to pay 
222550 (average amount we obtained from survey) annually to reduce the risk dying 
from motorcycle accidents from 10 to 5 in 100,000 (half the numder of fatalities in 
100,000). Therefore, the value of preventing one fatality in one accident is defined as 
the aggregate amount that all affected individuals in society are willing to pay for these 
small risk reductions. The corresponding VOSL would be Ug Shs 222550/(5/100,000) = 
(222550*100000)/5 = 4,450,000,000 ($1,780,000). This represents the estimated value 
of life. 
 
In the study out of the 1600 boda boda riders who participated in the  survey, over 96% 
of boda boda riders interviewed were willing to pay for a risk reduction which reduces 
the expected number of deaths from 10 to 5 out of 100,000. This implies that boda boda 
riders in Kampala are willing to pay price to reduce the risk of fatal motorcycle accident.  
Figure 11 presents the distribution of the willingness to pay values. It is evident in the 
figure that  boda boda riders are willing to pay between 3,000 and 5 millions shillings to 
reduce the number of deaths from motorcycle from 10 to 5 out of 100,000. However, the 
majority are willing to pay less than 100,000 shillings and between 100,000-500,000 
shillings (49.3%). The avearge amount the riders were willing to pay was 222550, 
impling that on average boda boda riders are willing to forfeit 222,550 a year in order to 

31 
 
obtain reduction in risk of dying from motorcycle accidents from 10 in 100, 000 to 5 in 
100,000. 
 
Table 1.8 presents the value of statistical life for Ugnada by means of contigent 
valuation. In th questionnaire results on willingness to pay to reduce fatality from 
motorcycle accidents indicate that boda boda riders were prepared to pay, on average 
222550 Ug shs for a risk reduction of five chance in 100,000 that they would be killed in 
the year due to motorcycle accidents. Therefore, the `value of an average life' in this 
instance would be (222550 x 100,000)/5 =4.45 billion Uganda shillings.  This is defined 
as the total amount that boda boda riders selected in Kampala would pay per year to 
save 5 statistical lives resulting from motorcycle accidents.  

32 
 
Table 1.8: The value of statistical life(VOSL) 
  
Description 
  
Average of MRS for all 
respondents give the WTP 
for a risk reduction which 
reduces expected deaths by 
1(5) 
Marginal rate of 
substitution 
(MRSi) 
Income change due a unit change 
in a risk given by: 
5
000
,
100
000
,
100
/
5
b
b
i
i
=
 
 bi  represent the average 
amount the boda boda riders 
were willing to pay 
Total  WTP 
This value is referred to as the 
value of saving  statistical life or 
marginal value of safety 
4,450,000,000 ($1,780,000) 
 
 
Economic Burden of Motorcycle Accident Costs  
To estimate the economic burden of motorcycle accidents in Uganda, medical costs of 
accidents, lost output due to severe injury and fatality, repair costs and human costs 
(pain, grief and suffering). The computation of lost output is based on 2012 Police Data 
that reported the number of persons killed and injured from motorcycle accidents. In 
2012, there were 3043 officially reported severe accidents from motorcycle accidents 
and 571 people who died. These figures exclude the number persons who had minor 
injuries. In the estimation of medical expenses, the computations are based on results 
obtained from a study in Mulago on the cost of treating a boda boda patient.  Pain, grief 
and suffering are calculated as a percentage of lost labour output due injury and fatality. 
The percentages considered are based Asian Development Bank estimates of 28% and 
50% of the total cost of a fatal and injury accident respectively. Table 1.9 shows the 
estimated economic burden of motorcycle accidents in Uganda is Ug shs 8, 
902,482,162 (approx US$ 3.6 million). Although these figures do not take into account 
the administrative and funeral costs of motorcycle accidents, the estimates reveal that if 
motorcycle accidents continue, country’s growth prospects will fall by US$ 3.6 million 

33 
 
annually. Medical expenses and lost output due to severe injury are the biggest 
component of motorcycle costs contributing 40% and 35% respectively.  
 
Table 1.9: Estimates of national motorcycle costs 
Item
Total cost 
(Ug shs) 
% Contribution  
Medical expenses 
3,534,268,943 
39.7 
Lost output due severe injury 
3,153,291,101 
35.4 
Lost output due to fatality 
225,216,071 
2.5 
Repair costs 
350,000,000 
3.9 
Human costs( Pain, grief and suffering) 
1,639,706,050 
18.4 
Total
8,902,482,165
(US$3.6 million) 
100.0
 
Factors influencing WTP values 
The relationship  between  the  WTP values (rider’s marginal value of safety)  and  the  
underlying influence of socio-economic factors was  investigated  by means  of a 
regression  analysis.  In this study, the log-linear regression model was applied to 
analyse the significant factors influencing willingness to pay of respondents. The 
independent variables considered in the analysis include the age in complete years, 
motorcycle riding experience, education dummies, marital status, motorcycle ownership 
status and dummy if ever experienced an accident.  The results of regression analysis 
are presented in the table 1.10 below. 

34 
 
Table 1.10: Regression analysis results 
LnMVS 
Coef. 
Robust Std. Err.
T 
P-value 
Age 
0.007
0.006
1.080
0.282
Monthly_income 
0.000
0.000
2.270
0.023*
Riding experience 
-0.005
0.010
-0.460
0.649
Primary 
-0.190
0.143
-1.330
0.182
Secondary 
-0.159
0.142
-1.120
0.264
Married 
-0.150
0.084
-1.780
0.076**
Number of_Dependants 
0.001
0.011
0.080
0.936
Ever_Had_Accident 
-0.049
0.062
-0.780
0.436
Owns_motorcycle 
0.217
0.071
3.060
0.002*
Constant 
21.289
0.226
94.370
0.000
“*” statistically significant at 5%; and “**” statistically significant at 10% 
 
The results in the table 1.10 above show that only three variables were statistically 
significant. These include income, marital status and motorcycle ownership. From 
economic point of view, positive significant effect of income concurs with many studies 
that have found that higher incomes are associated with higher WTP values.  As 
expected riders who own motorcycles significantly and positively influence WTP values.  
Surprisingly however, being married is associated with less WTP values when 
comparing with unmarried motorcycle riders. In many studies, age has proved to an 
important factor explaining willingness to pay for safety. In this study surprisingly, age is 
not statistically significant although it has the right sign. The other factors that are 
insignificant are education, number of dependents, riding experience and accident 
experience. The negative coefficient on education and riding experience suggest that 
these variables not only being unimportant in rider’s risk evaluation but they are 
associated with lower MVS. 

35 
 
WTP to reduce the risk of Severe Injury 
In the survey respondents were asked whether they are willing to pay 20,000 shillings 
for a helmet which reduces the risk of severe injury from 10 to 3 out of 100,000 people 
or reduction in risk of severe injury by 70%. The results in figure 12 show that over 95% 
of the boda boda riders who participated in the study were willing to pay 20,000 shillings 
to get a helmet which reduce the risk of severe injury by 70%. However, the willingness 
to pay for a helmet reduced more significantly as we varied the cost of helmet from 
20,000 to 140,000 shillings. This implies that although the majority of boda boda riders 
are willing to pay price premiums to acquire helmets that reduce severe injury, their 
willingness to pay undoubtedly is conditioned by the price of the helmet.  For example, 
the willingness to pay for a helmet dropped to 12% for a price between 80,000 and 
100,000 shillings and subsequently to 5% for prices above 100,000.  Therefore, any 
efforts to promote the use of quality helmets which are normally priced above 100,000 
shillings on the domestic market, one should consider price subsidization policy for the 
majority of the boda boda riders to acquire them.  
 
 

36 
 
 
 
 
Finally, we explored the willingness to pay 100,000 shillings to obtain a reflector jacket 
and helmet/training to reduce half the number of boda boda accidents and injury in 
Kampala. These are some of the interventions KCCA has proposed to implement in the 
efforts to streamline the boda boda industry in Kampala. The results in the figure 13 
below shows that 53.46% of the riders interviewed were not willing to pay for these 
activities. This implies that KCCA will face some challenges in changing the face of 
boda boda industry in Kampala. A well integrated programme that incoorpotates the 
views of different stakeholder in the boda boda industry is need to have smooth 
transition from disorganised to organised industry. 

37 
 
 
 
 
 
 

38 
 
Conclusions and recommendations 
The descriptive analysis from the study show that the incidence and risk of motorcycle 
accident is high and boda boda riders themselves are hugely to blame in most of the 
accidents they get involved in.  Therefore, safety initiatives should mostly target the 
behaviours of motorcycle riders alongside other road users. For instance, public 
awareness campaigns are needed to change the behaviour of motorcycle riders and 
also in supporting the enforcement of legislative traffic regulations and measures. It is 
perhaps true that most boda boda riders do not understand the health and economic 
implications associated with their reckless behaviour.  The study results provide rich 
information that is helpful for fact-based advocacy to change behaviour of boda riders. 
Information on the cost of accidents to the individual and society as a whole can be 
used by Boda boda associations, Local administrations and authorities and civil society 
organizations to influence behaviour change among boda boda riders. For instance, the 
awareness campaigns from these stakeholders should communicate to the riders the 
health and economic consequences of undesirable traffic behaviour and associated 
motorcycle accidents. The police should intensify the use of the combination of 
enforcement and penalties to prevent the violation of traffic regulations and increase 
road safety. 
This study highlights the direct and indirect cost of motorcycle accidents in Uganda 
using a multi-method approach. The quantitative estimates and descriptions from the 
qualitative interviews have provided both the tangible and intangible costs of motorcycle 
accidents (both for fatality and severe injuries) and estimates are considered to be huge 
for a poor developing country. This information should serve to provide a momentum for 
safety improvement of motorcycle industry in Kampala and the rest of the country. 
In the first part of cost estimation of motorcycle accidents, the study provides estimates 
of intangible costs (such as medical expenses, lost output/productivity due injury and 
death and repair costs). The estimates show that motorcycle accidents are associated 
with huge burdens borne by the accident victims and their families and friends, as well a 
society as a whole.  The estimation and presentation of these costs highlights the need 

39 
 
for every member of society to recognize and be aware of the importance of road 
safety. Clearly, the results show that it costs approximately 7 million shillings to treat a 
boda boda accident victim who is severely injured; and more 3 billion Uganda shillings 
was lost due to lost days away from productive work as result of severe injuries and  
death. The motorcycle repair costs accumulated to 350 million Uganda shillings based 
on 2012 police data on motorcycle accidents. 
 
The study also provides estimates of the value of preventing motorcycle accidents 
based on the willingness-to-pay method using a contingent evaluation. The estimates 
show that on average boda boda riders are willing to sacrifice Ug shs 222,550 a year  
for reduction in mortality risks associated with motorcycle accidents that translate into 
4.45 billion shillings ($1 1,780,000), the value of statistical life (VOSL). This  implyies 
that boda boda riders are willing to trade 4.45 billion shillings per year for a risk 
reduction which reduces the expected number of motorcycle fatalities from 10 to 5 lives. 
This represents the monetary value of increased safety and shows that boda boda 
riders are concerned about traffic safety and willing to trade a sizeable amount of 
money for improved safety. The estimates are quite comparable to those from other 
developing countries. Regression analysis results of the factors influencing marginal 
value of safety (MVS) reveal that income, marital status and ownership of motorcycles 
significantly influences rider’s evaluation of safety. The results on the  effects of 
motorcycle ownership on MVS should of interest to government and boda boda 
associations in efforts to streamline boda boda industry. The efforts that enable the 
riders to own the motorcycles seem to affect safety evaluations.  
 
In the summary, the economic burden motorcycle costs were approximately US$ 3.6 
million.  Although these figures do not take into account the administrative and funeral 
costs of motorcycle accidents, the estimates reveal that if motorcycle accidents 
continue, the country’s growth prospects will fall by US$ 3.6 million annually. Medical 
expenses and lost output due to severe injury are the biggest component of motorcycle 

40 
 
costs contributing 40% and 35% respectively.  The fact that the current initiatives and 
level of investment are inadequate  to halt or reverse the rising motorcycle fatalities and 
injuries, the political will and funding levels in the sector should be commensurate with 
the scale of accidents and associated economic costs. 
 
The qualitative part of the study reveals that the effect of pain, grief, and suffering when 
the Boda-boda rider gets an accident goes beyond the individual life of the rider and 
affects the work, health and the family life of the rider. Therefore in seeking to design 
intervention programs to help the riders involved in motorcycle accidents, it is important 
for such programs to adopt a holistic approach to be effective. In addition, there is need 
for intervention programs at both family-and-work level which can help the riders and 
their families to quickly recover from the pain, grief and suffering they face. What is 
clearly demonstrated in the study is that the family and the work place are the key areas 
of support for the rider to deal with the demise of the motorcycle accidents yet there was 
no report of any systematic intervention program in our interviews which is utilizing 
these institutions to help the riders overcome the cost of pain, grief and suffering caused 
by motorcycle accidents. Therefore, the existing boda boda associations and leadership 
structure at boda boda stage level should be empowered to have organized 
welfare/health care systems that can assist members when they face accidents. 
It is also demonstrated in the study that coping by Boda-boda accident victims is 
complicated by lack of professional support. The provision of professional support 
tailored to the unique conditions faced by the Boda-boda RTA victims should be a 
critical focus for effective policy intervention. We suggest the strategy of working with 
the family of the riders and the Boda-boda leadership stage structures to effectively 
extend such services. The study also offers some key insights into the necessary reform 
in the health system geared towards effectively meeting the needs of motorcycle 
accidents victims in the Boda-boda sector. Specifically, we recommend the need to 
promote health insurance tailored for the Boda-boda riders for them to afford 
personalized health care in the event of the RTA, and programs that geared at changing 

41 
 
the perception health workers towards boda boda accident victims. This can go a long 
way in addressing the cost of pain, grief and suffering they endure. 
Policy implications 
The paper presents the monetary value of increased safety from motorcycle accidents 
in Uganda and more specifically, the study presents both social and economic rationale 
for safety investments and interventions to improve the road traffic safety for 
motorcyclists. The key policy implication of the study is that reducing motorcycle 
causalities and fatalities will reduce social and economic sufferings of victims, unlock 
growth and free resources for more productive use. The findings provide the cost-
benefit analysis of any investment in areas that will promote the prevention, treatment, 
care and management of motorcycle accidents in Uganda.  

42 
 
 
References 
Abelson, P (2008). Establishing a Monetary Value for Lives Saved: Issues and 
 
Controversies. Working papers in cost benefit analysis, 2008-02. 
 
Anh, T.T., N.X, Dao and T.T Anh (2005). The cost of Road Traffic Accident in Vietnam. 
 
Proceedings of the Eastern Asia Society for Transporation Studies, Vol.5, 
 
pp1923-1933. 
Annual Crime and Traffic/Road Safety Report (2011). Uganda Police, republic of 
 
Uganda. 
 
Chaturabong, P, K, Kanitpong and P, Jiwattanakulpaisarn (2010). Analysis of 
 
Motorcycle Accident Cost in Thailand by Willingness-To-Pay Method. 12th 
 
WCTR, July 11-15, 2010 – Lisbon, Portugal. 
 
Jacobs, G., A. Aeron-Thomas, et al. (2000). Estimating Global Road Fatalities. London, 
 
Department for International Development, Transport Research Laboratory: 40. 
 
Jones-Lee, M. W. (1989). The Economic of Safety and Physical Risk, Basil Blackwell. 
 
Kigera  J,W.M.,  Nguku , L and  Naddumba,  E.K (2010). The Impact of Boda-Boda 
 
Motor Crashes on the Budget for Clinical Services at Mulago Hospital,  Kampala.  
 
East and Central African Journal of Surgery Volume 15 Number 1. 
Kobusingye, O., Guwatudde, D., and Lett, R. (2001). Injury patterns in rural and urban 
 
Uganda. Injury Prevention. 2001; 7:46-50. 
 
Kobusingye, O., Guwatudde, D., Owor, G., Lett, R. (2002) City wide trauma experience 
 
in Kampala, Uganda: a call for intervention. Injury Prevention 2002; 8(2):133-6. 
 
Krupnick, A., Alberini, A., Simon, N., O’Brien, B., Goeree, R. and Heintzelman, M. 
 
(2002), Age, Health and the Willingness to Pay for Mortality Risk Reductions: A 
 
Contingent Valuation Survey of Ontario Residents, Journal of Risk and 
 
Uncertainty, 24:2. 
 
Mahmud, M (2005). Contingent Valuation of Mortality Risk Reduction in Developing 
 
Countries: A Mission Impossible? Working papers in Economics No 169. 
 
Maier, G., S.Gerking, and P.Weiss (1989). Economics of Traffic Accidents on Austrian 
 
Roads: Risk Lovers or Policy Deficit? Empirica-Austrian Economic Papers, Vol 
 
16, No.2 pp177-192. 
 

43 
 
Muhumuza, S (2012). Evaluation report for the Helmet use project among Commercial 
 
Boda Boda Operators in Kampala under the Uganda Helmet Vaccine Initiative 
 
(UHVI). 
Peden, M.  (2004). World Report on Road Traffic Injury Prevention. Geneva, WHO, 
 
2004.  
 
Sakashita, C., S.Jan and R.Ivers (2012). The application of Contingent Valuation 
 
Surveys to obtain willingness to pay data in road safety research: Methodological 
 
review and recommendations. Australian Road Safety Research, Policing and 
 
Education Conference 2012. 
 
Silcock, R and Transport Research Laboratory (TRL) (2003). Guidelines for Estimating 
 
the Cost of Road Crashes in Developing Countries, Final Report, Department for 
 
International Development Project R7780. Transport Research Laboratory. 
 
Transport Research Laboratory, (1995). “Costing Road Accident in Developing 
 
Countries”, Overseas Development Administration, London, pp. 17. 
 
Umar R,  R.R. Mackay,  G.  M and  Hill B. L, (1995),  preliminary  Analysis  of 
 
Motorcycle  Accidents:  Short  Term  Impact  of the  Running  Headlights  
 
Campaign  and Regulation,  Journal  of Traffic  Medicine,  Yol.23,  17-28 
 
Widyastuti and Mulley, (2005). Evaluation of Casualty Cost of Motorcyclist’s Slight Injury 
 
in Indonesia, Journal of the Eastern Asia Society for Transportation Studies, 
 
Vol.6, pp. 3497 – 3507. 
 
Widyastuti, H (2012). Valuing Motorcycle Casualties in Developing Countries using 
 
Willingness-to-Pay Method: Stated-Preference Discrete Choice Modelling 
 
Approach. A thesis submitted for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy in Transport 
 
at the University of Newcastle upon Tyne. 
 
Widyastuti, H. and R.N. Bird, (2004). “Assessing the social cost of motorcycle casualties 
 
in developing countries”, Proceedings of the 36th Annual Conference of the 
 
Universities Transport Study Group, 5-7 January, Newcastle. 
