The Elements of Style
 
William Strunk, Jr.
 
 
 
Newly Revised and Edited by Chris Hong
 
Former Editor, Harvard University
 
 
 
© 2011
 
The Elements of Style Press
 

 
 

TABLE OF CONTENTS
 
I. INTRODUCTORY
 
II. ELEMENTARY RULES OF USAGE
1. Form the possessive singular of nouns with 's.
2. In a series of three or more terms with a single
conjunction, use a comma after each term except the last.
3. Enclose parenthetic expressions between commas.
4. Place a comma before and or but introducing an
independent clause.
5. Do not join independent clauses by a comma.
6. Do not break sentences in two.
7. A participial phrase at the beginning of a sentence must
refer to the grammatical subject.
8. Divide words at line-ends, in accordance with their
formation and pronunciation.
 
III. ELEMENTARY PRINCIPLES OF COMPOSITION
9. Make the paragraph the unit of composition: one
paragraph to each topic.
10. As a rule, begin each paragraph with a topic sentence;
end it in conformity with the beginning.
11. Use the active voice.
12. Put statements in positive form.
13. Omit needless words.
14. Avoid a succession of loose sentences.
15. Express co-ordinate ideas in similar form.
16. Keep related words together.

17. In summaries, keep to one tense.
18. Place the emphatic words of a sentence at the end.
 
IV. A FEW MATTERS OF FORM
 
V. WORDS AND EXPRESSIONS COMMONLY
MISUSED
 
VI. WORDS OFTEN MISSPELLED
 
 

 
 

I. INTRODUCTORY
 
This book is intended for use in English courses in which
the practice of composition is combined with the study of
literature. It aims to give in brief space the principal
requirements of plain English style. It aims to lighten the task of
instructor and student by concentrating attention (in Chapters II
and III) on a few essentials, the rules of usage and principles of
composition most commonly violated. The numbers of the
sections may be used as references in correcting manuscript.
 
The book covers only a small portion of the field of English
style, but the experience of its writer has been that once past the
essentials, students profit most by individual instruction based
on the problems of their own work, and that each instructor has
his own body of theory, which he prefers to that offered by any
textbook.
 
 It is an old observation that the best writers sometimes
disregard the rules of rhetoric. When they do so, however, the
reader will usually find in the sentence some compensating
merit, attained at the cost of the violation. Unless he is certain
of doing as well, he will probably do best to follow the rules.
After he has learned, by their guidance, to write plain English
adequate for everyday uses, let him look, for the secrets of
style, to the study of the masters of literature.
 

 
 

II. ELEMENTARY RULES OF USAGE
 
1. Form the possessive singular of nouns with 's.
 
Follow this rule whatever the final consonant. Thus write,
 
Charles's friend, Burns's poems, the witch's malice, the
Beatles’s concert tour
 
This is the usage of the United States Government Printing
Office and of the Oxford University Press.
 
Exceptions are the possessives of ancient proper names in -
es and -is, the possessive Jesus', and such forms as for
conscience' sake, for righteousness' sake. But such forms as
Achilles' heel, Moses' laws, Isis' temple are commonly
replaced by
 
the heel of Achilles the laws of Moses, the temple of Isis
 
The pronominal possessives hers, its, theirs, yours, and
oneself have no apostrophe.
 

 
 
2. In a series of three or more terms with a single
conjunction, use a comma after each term except the last.
 
Thus write,
 
red, white, and blue
 
honest, energetic, but headstrong
 
He opened the letter, read it, and made a note of its
contents.
 
This is also the usage of the Government Printing Office and
of the Oxford University Press.
 
In the names of business firms the last comma is omitted, as
 
Brown, Shipley and Company
 
The abbreviation etc., even if only a single term comes
before it, is always preceded by a comma.
 

 
 
3. Enclose parenthetic expressions between commas.
 
The best way to see a country, unless you are pressed for
time, is to travel on foot.
 
This rule is difficult to apply; it is frequently hard to decide
whether a single word, such as however, or a brief phrase, is or
is not parenthetic. If the interruption to the flow of the sentence
is but slight, the writer may safely omit the commas. But
whether the interruption be slight or considerable, he must
never omit one comma and leave the other. Such punctuation as
 
Marjorie's husband, Colonel Nelson paid us a visit
yesterday,
 
or
 
My brother you will be pleased to hear, is now in perfect
health,
 
is indefensible.
 
Non-restrictive relative clauses are, in accordance with this
rule, set off by commas.
 
The audience, which had at first been indifferent, became
more and more interested.
 
Similar clauses introduced by where and when are similarly
punctuated.

 
In 1769, when Napoleon was born, Corsica had but
recently been acquired by France.
 
Nether Stowey, where Coleridge wrote The Rime of the
Ancient Mariner, is a few miles from Bridgewater.
 
In these sentences the clauses introduced by which, when,
and where are non-restrictive; they do not limit the application
of the words on which they depend, but add, parenthetically,
statements supplementing those in the principal clauses. Each
sentence is a combination of two statements which might have
been made independently.
 
The audience was at first indifferent. Later it became
more and more interested.
 
Napoleon was born in 1769. At that time Corsica had but
recently been acquired by France.
 
Coleridge wrote The Rime of the Ancient Mariner at
Nether Stowey. Nether Stowey is only a few miles from
Bridgewater.
 
Restrictive relative clauses are not set off by commas.
 
The candidate who best meets these requirements will
obtain the place.
 
In this sentence the relative clause restricts the application
of the word candidate to a single person. Unlike those above,
the sentence cannot be split into two independent statements.
 
The abbreviations etc. and jr. are always preceded by a

comma, and except at the end of a sentence, followed by one.
 
Similar in principle to the enclosing of parenthetic
expressions between commas is the setting off by commas of
phrases or dependent clauses preceding or following the main
clause of a sentence. The sentences quoted in this section and
under Rules 4, 5, 6, 7, 16, and 18 should afford sufficient
guidance.
 
If a parenthetic expression is preceded by a conjunction,
place the first comma before the conjunction, not after it.
 
He saw us coming, and unaware that we had learned of
his treachery, greeted us with a smile.
 
 
 

 
 
4. Place a comma before and or but introducing an
independent clause.
 
The early records of the city have disappeared, and the
story of its first years can no longer be reconstructed.
 
The situation is perilous, but there is still one chance of
escape.
 
Sentences of this type, isolated from their context, may seem
to be in need of rewriting. As they make complete sense when
the comma is reached, the second clause has the appearance of
an after-thought. Further, and, is the least specific of
connectives. Used between independent clauses, it indicates
only that a relation exists between them without defining that
relation. In the example above, the relation is that of cause and
result. The two sentences might be rewritten:
 
As the early records of the city have disappeared, the
story of its first years can no longer be reconstructed.
 
Although the situation is perilous, there is still one chance
of escape.
 
Or the subordinate clauses might be replaced by phrases:
 
Owing to the disappearance of the early records of the
city, the story of its first years can no longer be
reconstructed.

 
In this perilous situation, there is still one chance of
escape.
 
But a writer may err by making his sentences too uniformly
compact and periodic, and an occasional loose sentence
prevents the style from becoming too formal and gives the
reader a certain relief. Consequently, loose sentences of the
type first quoted are common in easy, unstudied writing. But a
writer should be careful not to construct too many of his
sentences after this pattern (see Rule 14).
 
Two-part sentences of which the second member is
introduced by as (in the sense of because), for, or, nor, and
while (in the sense of and at the same time) likewise require a
comma before the conjunction.
 
If a dependent clause, or an introductory phrase requiring to
be set off by a comma, precedes the second independent clause,
no comma is needed after the conjunction.
 
The situation is perilous, but if we are prepared to act
promptly, there is still one chance of escape.
 
For two-part sentences connected by an adverb, see the next
section.
 

 
 
5. Do not join independent clauses by a comma.
 
If two or more clauses, grammatically complete and not
joined by a conjunction, are to form a single compound
sentence, the proper mark of punctuation is a semicolon.
 
Stevenson's romances are entertaining; they are full of
exciting adventures.
 
It is nearly half past five; we cannot reach town before
dark.
 
 
 
It is of course equally correct to write the above as two
sentences each, replacing the semicolons by periods.
 
Stevenson's romances are entertaining. They are full of
exciting adventures.
 
It is nearly half past five. We cannot reach town before
dark.
 
 
 
If a conjunction is inserted, the proper mark is a comma
(Rule 4).
 
Stevenson's romances are entertaining, for they are full of
exciting adventures.
 

It is nearly half past five, and we cannot reach town
before dark.
 
 
 
Note that if the second clause is preceded by an adverb,
such as accordingly, besides, so, then, therefore, or thus, and
not by a conjunction, the semicolon is still required.
 
I had never been in the place before; so I had difficulty in
finding my way about.
 
In general, however, it is best, in writing, to avoid using so
in this manner; there is danger that the writer who uses it at all
may use it too often. A simple correction, usually serviceable,
is to omit the word so, and begin the first clause with as:
 
As I had never been in the place before, I had difficulty in
finding my way about.,
 
 
 
If the clauses are very short, and are alike in form, a comma
is usually permissible:
 
Man proposes, God disposes.
 
The gate swung apart, the bridge fell, the portcullis was
drawn up.
 

 
 
6. Do not break sentences in two.
 
In other words, do not use periods for commas.
 
I met them on a cruise several years ago. Coming home
from Liverpool to New York.
 
He was an interesting talker. A man who had traveled all
over the world, and lived in half a dozen countries.
 
In both these examples, the first period should be replaced
by a comma, and the following word begun with a small letter.
 
It is permissible to make an emphatic word or expression
serve the purpose of a sentence and to punctuate it accordingly:
 
Again and again he called out. No reply.
 
The writer must, however, be certain that the emphasis is
warranted, and that he will not be suspected of a mere blunder
in punctuation.
 
Rules 3, 4, 5, and 6 cover the most important principles in
the punctuation of ordinary sentences; they should be so
thoroughly mastered that their application becomes second
nature.
 

 
 7. A participial phrase at the beginning of a sentence must
refer to the grammatical subject.
 
Walking slowly down the road, he saw a woman
accompanied by two children.
 
The word walking refers to the subject of the sentence, not
to the woman. If the writer wishes to make it refer to the
woman, he must recast the sentence:
 
He saw a woman, accompanied by two children, walking
slowly down the road.
 
Participial phrases preceded by a conjunction or by a
preposition, adjectives, and adjective phrases come under the
same rule if they begin the sentence.
 
On arriving in Chicago, his friends met him at the station.
> When he arrived (or, On his arrival) in Chicago, his
friends met him at the station.
 
A soldier of proved valor, they entrusted him with the
defence of the city. > A soldier of proved valor, he was
entrusted with the defence of the city.
 
Young and inexperienced, the task seemed easy to me. >
Young and inexperienced, I thought the task easy.
 
Without a friend to counsel him, the temptation proved
irresistible. > Without a friend to counsel him, he found the

temptation irresistible.
 
 
 
Sentences violating this rule are often ludicrous.
 
Being in a dilapidated condition, I was able to buy the
house very cheap.
 
 
 

 
 
8. Divide words at line-ends, in accordance with their
formation and pronunciation.
 
If there is room at the end of a line for one or more
syllables of a word, but not for the whole word, divide the
word, unless this involves cutting off only a single letter, or
cutting off only two letters of a long word. No hard and fast rule
for all words can be laid down. The principles most frequently
applicable are:
 A.                Divide the word according to its formation:
 
know-ledge (not knowl-edge);
 
Shake-speare (not Shakes-peare);
 
de-scribe (not des-cribe);
 
atmo-sphere (not atmos-phere);
 
 
 B.                 Divide "on the vowel:"
 
edi-ble (not ed-ible);
 
propo-sition;
 
ordi-nary;
 
espe-cial;
 

reli-gious;
 
oppo-nents;
 
regu-lar;
 
classi-fi-ca-tion (three divisions possible);
 
deco-rative;
 
presi-dent;
 
 
 C.                 Divide between double letters, unless they come at
the end of the simple form of the word:
 
Apen-nines;
 
Cincin-nati;
 
refer-ring;
 
but tell-ing.
 
 
 
The treatment of consonants in combination is best shown
from examples:
 
for-tune;
 
pic-ture;
 
presump-tuous;
 
illus-tration;

 
sub-stan-tial (either division);
 
indus-try;
 
instruc-tion;
 
sug-ges-tion;
 
incen-diary.
 
The student will do well to examine the syllable-division in
a number of pages of any carefully printed book.
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

III. ELEMENTARY PRINCIPLES OF
COMPOSITION
 
 
 
9. Make the paragraph the unit of composition: one
paragraph to each topic.
 
If the subject on which you are writing is of slight extent, or
if you intend to treat it very briefly, there may be no need of
subdividing it into topics. Thus a brief description, a brief
summary of a literary work, a brief account of a single incident,
a narrative merely outlining an action, the setting forth of a
single idea, any one of these is best written in a single
paragraph. After the paragraph has been written, it should be
examined to see whether subdivision will not improve it.
 
Ordinarily, however, a subject requires subdivision into
topics, each of which should be made the subject of a
paragraph. The object of treating each topic in a paragraph by
itself is, of course, to aid the reader. The beginning of each
paragraph is a signal to him that a new step in the development
of the subject has been reached.
 
The extent of subdivision will vary with the length of the
composition. For example, a short notice of a book or poem
might consist of a single paragraph. One slightly longer might
consist of two paragraphs:
 

A.           Account of the work.
B.            Critical discussion.
 
A report on a poem, written for a class in literature, might
consist of seven paragraphs:
C.            Facts of composition and publication.
 D.           Kind of poem; metrical form.
 E.            Subject.
 F.             Treatment of subject.
 G.           For what chiefly remarkable.
 H.           Wherein characteristic of the writer.
 I.              Relationship to other works.
 
The contents of paragraphs C and D would vary with the
poem. Usually, paragraph C would indicate the actual or
imagined circumstances of the poem (the situation), if these call
for explanation, and would then state the subject and outline its
development. If the poem is a narrative in the third person
throughout, paragraph C need contain no more than a concise
summary of the action. Paragraph D would indicate the leading
ideas and show how they are made prominent, or would
indicate what points in the narrative are chiefly emphasized.
 
A novel might be discussed under the heads:
 J.              Setting.
 K.           Plot.

 L.            Characters.
 M.          Purpose.
 
A historical event might be discussed under the heads:
 N.           What led up to the event.
 O.           Account of the event.
 P.             What the event led up to.
 
In treating either of these last two subjects, the writer would
probably find it necessary to subdivide one or more of the
topics here given.
 
As a rule, single sentences should not be written or printed
as paragraphs. An exception may be made of sentences of
transition, indicating the relation between the parts of an
exposition or argument.
 
In dialogue, each speech, even if only a single word, is a
paragraph by itself; that is, a new paragraph begins with each
change of speaker. The application of this rule, when dialogue
and narrative are combined, is best learned from examples in
well-printed works of fiction.
 

 
 10. As a rule, begin each paragraph with a topic sentence;
end it in conformity with the beginning.
 
Again, the object is to aid the reader. The practice here
recommended enables him to discover the purpose of each
paragraph as he begins to read it, and to retain the purpose in
mind as he ends it. For this reason, the most generally useful
kind of paragraph, particularly in exposition and argument, is
that in which
 A.           the topic sentence comes at or near the beginning;
 B.            the succeeding sentences explain or establish or
develop the statement made in the topic sentence; and
 C.            the final sentence either emphasizes the thought of the
topic sentence or states some important consequence.
 
Ending with a digression, or with an unimportant detail, is
particularly to be avoided.
 
If the paragraph forms part of a larger composition, its
relation to what precedes, or its function as a part of the whole,
may need to be expressed. This can sometimes be done by a
mere word or phrase (again; therefore; for the same reason)
in the topic sentence. Sometimes, however, it is expedient to
precede the topic sentence by one or more sentences of
introduction or transition. If more than one such sentence is
required, it is generally better to set apart the transitional

sentences as a separate paragraph.
 
According to the writer's purpose, he may, as indicated
above, relate the body of the paragraph to the topic sentence in
one or more of several different ways. He may make the
meaning of the topic sentence clearer by restating it in other
forms, by defining its terms, by denying the converse, by giving
illustrations or specific instances; he may establish it by proofs;
or he may develop it by showing its implications and
consequences. In a long paragraph, he may carry out several of
these processes.
 
1 Now, to be properly enjoyed, a walking tour should be
gone upon alone. (Topic sentence.)
 
2 If you go in a company, or even in pairs, it is no longer a
walking tour in anything but name; it is something else and
more in the nature of a picnic. (The meaning made clearer by
denial of the contrary.)
 
3 A walking tour should be gone upon alone, because
freedom is of the essence; because you should be able to stop
and go on, and follow this way or that, as the freak takes you;
and because you must have your own pace, and neither trot
alongside a champion walker, nor mince in time with a girl.
(The topic sentence repeated, in abridged form, and supported
by three reasons; the meaning of the third ("you must have your
own pace") made clearer by denying the converse.)
 
4 And you must be open to all impressions and let your
thoughts take colour from what you see. (A fourth reason,
stated in two forms.)

 
5 You should be as a pipe for any wind to play upon. (The
same reason, stated in still another form.)
 
6 "I cannot see the wit," says Hazlitt, "of walking and
talking at the same time. (The same reason as stated by
Hazlitt.)
 
7 When I am in the country, I wish to vegetate like the
country," which is the gist of all that can be said upon the
matter. (The same reason as stated by Hazlitt.)
 
8 There should be no cackle of voices at your elbow, to jar
on the meditative silence of the morning. (Repetition, in
paraphrase, of the quotation from Hazlitt.)
 
9 And so long as a man is reasoning he cannot surrender
himself to that fine intoxication that comes of much motion in
the open air, that begins in a sort of dazzle and sluggishness
of the brain, and ends in a peace that passes comprehension.
—Stevenson, Walking Tours. (Final statement of the fourth
reason, in language amplified and heightened to form a strong
conclusion.)
 
 
 
1 It was chiefly in the eighteenth century that a very
different conception of history grew up. (Topic sentence.)
 
2 Historians then came to believe that their task was not
so much to paint a picture as to solve a problem; to explain or
illustrate the successive phases of national growth,
prosperity, and adversity. (The meaning of the topic sentence

made clearer; the new conception of history defined.)
 
3 The history of morals, of industry, of intellect, and of
art; the changes that take place in manners or beliefs; the
dominant ideas that prevailed in successive periods; the rise,
fall, and modification of political constitutions; in a word, all
the conditions of national well-being became the subjects of
their works. (The definition expanded.)
 
4 They sought rather to write a history of peoples than a
history of kings. (The definition explained by contrast.)
 
5 They looked especially in history for the chain of causes
and effects. (The definition supplemented: another element in
the new conception of history.)
 
6 They undertook to study in the past the physiology of
nations, and hoped by applying the experimental method on a
large scale to deduce some lessons of real value about the
conditions on which the welfare of society mainly depend.—
Lecky, The Political Value of History. (Conclusion: an
important consequence of the new conception of history.)
 
In narration and description the paragraph sometimes begins
with a concise, comprehensive statement serving to hold
together the details that follow.
 
The breeze served us admirably.
 
The campaign opened with a series of reverses.
 
The next ten or twelve pages were filled with a curious set
of entries.

 
 
 
But this device, if too often used, would become a
mannerism. More commonly the opening sentence simply
indicates by its subject with what the paragraph is to be
principally concerned.
 
At length I thought I might return towards the stockade.
 
He picked up the heavy lamp from the table and began to
explore.
 
Another flight of steps, and they emerged on the roof.
 
 
 
The brief paragraphs of animated narrative, however, are
often without even this semblance of a topic sentence. The
break between them serves the purpose of a rhetorical pause,
throwing into prominence some detail of the action.
 

 
 
11. Use the active voice.
 
 
 
The active voice is usually more direct and vigorous than
the passive:
 
I shall always remember my first visit to Boston.
 
This is much better than
 
My first visit to Boston will always be remembered by me.
 
The latter sentence is less direct, less bold, and less
concise. If the writer tries to make it more concise by omitting
"by me,"
 
My first visit to Boston will always be remembered,
 
it becomes indefinite: is it the writer, or some person
undisclosed, or the world at large, that will always remember
this visit?
 
This rule does not, of course, mean that the writer should
entirely discard the passive voice, which is frequently
convenient and sometimes necessary.
 
The dramatists of the Restoration are little esteemed to-
day.
 
Modern readers have little esteem for the dramatists of

the Restoration.
 
The first would be the right form in a paragraph on the
dramatists of the Restoration; the second, in a paragraph on the
tastes of modern readers. The need of making a particular word
the subject of the sentence will often, as in these examples,
determine which voice is to be used.
 
The habitual use of the active voice, however, makes for
forcible writing. This is true not only in narrative principally
concerned with action, but in writing of any kind. Many a tame
sentence of description or exposition can be made lively and
emphatic by substituting a transitive in the active voice for
some such perfunctory expression as there is, or could be
heard.
 
There were a great number of dead leaves lying on the
ground.
 
Dead leaves covered the ground.
 
The sound of the falls could still be heard.
 
The sound of the falls still reached our ears.
 
The reason that he left college was that his health became
impaired.
 
Failing health compelled him to leave college.
 
It was not long before he was very sorry that he had said
what he had.
 
He soon repented his words.

 
 
 
As a rule, avoid making one passive depend directly upon
another.
 
Gold was not allowed to be exported.
 
It was forbidden to export gold (The export of gold was
prohibited).
 
He has been proved to have been seen entering the
building.
 
It has been proved that he was seen to enter the building.
 
 
 
In both the examples above, before correction, the word
properly related to the second passive is made the subject of
the first.
 
A common fault is to use as the subject of a passive
construction a noun which expresses the entire action, leaving
to the verb no function beyond that of completing the sentence.
 
A survey of this region was made in 1900. > This region
was surveyed in 1900.
 
Mobilization of the army was rapidly carried out. > The
army was rapidly mobilized.
 
Confirmation of these reports cannot be obtained. >
These reports cannot be confirmed.
 
Compare the sentence, "The export of gold was prohibited,"

in which the predicate "was prohibited" expresses something
not implied in "export."
 

 
 
12. Put statements in positive form.
 
Make definite assertions. Avoid tame, colorless, hesitating,
non-committal language. Use the word not as a means of denial
or in antithesis, never as a means of evasion.
 
He was not very often on time. > He usually came late.
 
He did not think that studying Latin was much use. > He
thought the study of Latin useless.
 
The Taming of the Shrew is rather weak in spots.
Shakespeare does not portray Katharine as a very admirable
character, nor does Bianca remain long in memory as an
important character in Shakespeare's works. > The women in
The Taming of the Shrew are unattractive. Katharine is
disagreeable, Bianca insignificant.
 
The last example, before correction, is indefinite as well as
negative. The corrected version, consequently, is simply a
guess at the writer's intention.
 
All three examples show the weakness inherent in the word
not. Consciously or unconsciously, the reader is dissatisfied
with being told only what is not; he wishes to be told what is.
Hence, as a rule, it is better to express a negative in positive
form.
 
not hones > dishonest

 
not important > trifling
 
did not remember > forgot
 
did not pay any attention to > ignored
 
did not have much confidence in > distrusted
 
The antithesis of negative and positive is strong:
 
Not charity, but simple justice.
 
Not that I loved Caesar less, but Rome the more.
 
Negative words other than not are usually strong:
 
The sun never sets upon the British flag.
 
 
 

 
 
13. Omit needless words.
 
Vigorous writing is concise. A sentence should contain no
unnecessary words, a paragraph no unnecessary sentences, for
the same reason that a drawing should have no unnecessary
lines and a machine no unnecessary parts. This requires not that
the writer make all his sentences short, or that he avoid all
detail and treat his subjects only in outline, but that every word
tell.
 
Many expressions in common use violate this principle:
 
the question as to whether > whether (the question
whether)
 
there is no doubt but that > no doubt (doubtless)
 
used for fuel purposes > used for fuel
 
he is a man who > he
 
in a hasty manner > hastily
 
this is a subject which > this subject
 
His story is a strange one. > His story is strange.
 
In especial the expression the fact that should be revised
out of every sentence in which it occurs.
 
owing to the fact that > since (because)

 
in spite of the fact that > though (although)
 
call your attention to the fact that > remind you (notify
you)
 
I was unaware of the fact that > I was unaware that (did
not know)
 
the fact that he had not succeeded > his failure
 
the fact that I had arrived > my arrival
 
 
 
See also under case, character, nature, system in Chapter
V.
 
Who is, which was, and the like are often superfluous.
 
His brother, who is a member of the same firm > His
brother, a member of the same firm
 
Trafalgar, which was Nelson's last battle > Trafalgar,
Nelson's last battle
 
As positive statement is more concise than negative, and the
active voice more concise than the passive, many of the
examples given under Rules 11 and 12 illustrate this rule as
well.
 
A common violation of conciseness is the presentation of a
single complex idea, step by step, in a series of sentences
which might to advantage be combined into one.
 
Macbeth was very ambitious. This led him to wish to

become king of Scotland. The witches told him that this wish
of his would come true. The king of Scotland at this time was
Duncan. Encouraged by his wife, Macbeth murdered Duncan.
He was thus enabled to succeed Duncan as king. (55 words.)
> Encouraged by his wife, Macbeth achieved his ambition
and realized the prediction of the witches by murdering
Duncan and becoming king of Scotland in his place. (26
words.)
 
 
 

 
 
14. Avoid a succession of loose sentences.
 
This rule refers especially to loose sentences of a particular
type, those consisting of two co-ordinate clauses, the second
introduced by a conjunction or relative. Although single
sentences of this type may be unexceptionable (see under Rule
4), a series soon becomes monotonous and tedious.
 
An unskilled writer will sometimes construct a whole
paragraph of sentences of this kind, using as connectives and,
but, and less frequently, who, which, when, where, and while,
these last in non-restrictive senses (see under Rule 3).
 
The third concert of the subscription series was given last
evening, and a large audience was in attendance. Mr. Edward
Appleton was the soloist, and the Boston Symphony Orchestra
furnished the instrumental music. The former showed himself
to be an artist of the first rank, while the latter proved itself
fully deserving of its high reputation. The interest aroused by
the series has been very gratifying to the Committee, and it is
planned to give a similar series annually hereafter. The fourth
concert will be given on Tuesday, May 10, when an equally
attractive program will be presented.
 
Apart from its triteness and emptiness, the paragraph above
is bad because of the structure of its sentences, with their
mechanical symmetry and sing-song. Contrast with them the
sentences in the paragraphs quoted under Rule 10, or in any

piece of good English prose, as the preface (Before the Curtain)
to Vanity Fair.
 
If the writer finds that he has written a series of sentences of
the type described, he should recast enough of them to remove
the monotony, replacing them by simple sentences, by sentences
of two clauses joined by a semicolon, by periodic sentences of
two clauses, by sentences, loose or periodic, of three clauses—
whichever best represent the real relations of the thought.
 

 
 
15. Express co-ordinate ideas in similar form.
 
This principle, that of parallel construction, requires that
expressions of similar content and function should be outwardly
similar. The likeness of form enables the reader to recognize
more readily the likeness of content and function. Familiar
instances from the Bible are the Ten Commandments, the
Beatitudes, and the petitions of the Lord's Prayer.
 
The unskilled writer often violates this principle, from a
mistaken belief that he should constantly vary the form of his
expressions. It is true that in repeating a statement in order to
emphasize it he may have need to vary its form. For illustration,
see the paragraph from Stevenson quoted under Rule 10. But
apart from this, he should follow the principle of parallel
construction.
 
Formerly, science was taught by the textbook method,
while now the laboratory method is employed. > Formerly,
science was taught by the textbook method; now it is taught
by the laboratory method.
 
The left-hand version gives the impression that the writer is
undecided or timid; he seems unable or afraid to choose one
form of expression and hold to it. The right-hand version shows
that the writer has at least made his choice and abided by it.
 
By this principle, an article or a preposition applying to all
the members of a series must either be used only before the first

term or else be repeated before each term.
 
The French, the Italians, Spanish, and Portuguese > The
French, the Italians, the Spanish, and the Portuguese
 
In spring, summer, or in winter > In spring, summer, or
winter (In spring, in summer, or in winter)
 
Correlative expressions (both, and; not, but; not only, but
also; either, or; first, second, third; and the like) should be
followed by the same grammatical construction. Many
violations of this rule can be corrected by rearranging the
sentence.
 
It was both a long ceremony and very tedious. > The
ceremony was both long and tedious.
 
A time not for words, but action > A time not for words,
but for action
 
Either you must grant his request or incur his ill will. >
You must either grant his request or incur his ill will.
 
My objections are, first, the injustice of the measure;
second, that it is unconstitutional. > My objections are, first,
that 
the 
measure 
is 
unjust; 
second, 
that 
it 
is
unconstitutional.
 
See also the third example under Rule 12 and the last under
Rule 13.
 
It may be asked, what if a writer needs to express a very
large number of similar ideas, say twenty? Must he write
twenty consecutive sentences of the same pattern? On closer

examination he will probably find that the difficulty is
imaginary, that his twenty ideas can be classified in groups, and
that he need apply the principle only within each group.
Otherwise he had best avoid the difficulty by putting his
statements in the form of a table.
 

 
 
16. Keep related words together.
 
The position of the words in a sentence is the principal
means of showing their relationship. The writer must therefore,
so far as possible, bring together the words, and groups of
words, that are related in thought, and keep apart those which
are not so related.
 
The subject of a sentence and the principal verb should not,
as a rule, be separated by a phrase or clause that can be
transferred to the beginning.
 
Wordsworth, in the fifth book of The Excursion, gives a
minute description of this church. > In the fifth book of The
Excursion, Wordsworth gives a minute description of this
church.
 
Cast iron, when treated in a Bessemer converter, is
changed into steel. > By treatment in a Bessemer converter,
cast iron is changed into steel.
 
The objection is that the interposed phrase or clause
needlessly interrupts the natural order of the main clause. This
objection, however, does not usually hold when the order is
interrupted only by a relative clause or by an expression in
apposition. Nor does it hold in periodic sentences in which the
interruption is a deliberately used means of creating suspense
(see examples under Rule 18).
 

The relative pronoun should come, as a rule, immediately
after its antecedent.
 
There was a look in his eye that boded mischief. > In his
eye was a look that boded mischief.
 
He wrote three articles about his adventures in Spain,
which were published in Harper's Magazine. > He published
in Harper's Magazine three articles about his adventures in
Spain.
 
This is a portrait of Benjamin Harrison, grandson of
William Henry Harrison, who became President in 1889. >
This is a portrait of Benjamin Harrison, grandson of
William Henry Harrison. He became President in 1889.
 
If the antecedent consists of a group of words, the relative
comes at the end of the group, unless this would cause
ambiguity.
 
A proposal to amend the Sherman Act, which has been
variously judged > A proposal, which has been variously
judged, to amend the Sherman Act
 
Or
 
> A proposal to amend the much-debated Sherman Act
 
The grandson of William Henry Harrison, who > William
Henry Harrison's grandson, Benjamin Harrison, who
 
A noun in apposition may come between antecedent and
relative, because in such a combination no real ambiguity can
arise.

 
The Duke of York, his brother, who was regarded with
hostility by the Whigs
 
Modifiers should come, if possible next to the word they
modify. If several expressions modify the same word, they
should be so arranged that no wrong relation is suggested.
 
All the members were not present. > Not all the members
were present.
 
He only found two mistakes. > He found only two
mistakes.
 
Major R. E. Joyce will give a lecture on Tuesday evening
in Bailey Hall, to which the public is invited, on "My
Experiences in Mesopotamia" at eight P. M. > On Tuesday
evening at eight P. M., Major R. E. Joyce will give in Bailey
Hall a lecture on "My Experiences in Mesopotamia." The
public is invited.
 
 
 

 
 
17. In summaries, keep to one tense.
 
In summarizing the action of a drama, the writer should
always use the present tense. In summarizing a poem, story, or
novel, he should preferably use the present, though he may use
the past if he prefers. If the summary is in the present tense,
antecedent action should be expressed by the perfect; if in the
past, by the past perfect.
 
An unforeseen chance prevents Friar John from
delivering Friar Lawrence's letter to Romeo. Juliet,
meanwhile, owing to her father's arbitrary change of the
day set for her wedding, has been compelled to drink the
potion on Tuesday night, with the result that Balthasar
informs Romeo of her supposed death before Friar
Lawrence learns of the nondelivery of the letter.
 
But whichever tense be used in the summary, a past tense in
indirect discourse or in indirect question remains unchanged.
 
The Legate inquires who struck the blow.
 
Apart from the exceptions noted, whichever tense the writer
chooses, he should use throughout. Shifting from one tense to
the other gives the appearance of uncertainty and irresolution
(compare Rule 15).
 
In presenting the statements or the thought of some one else,
as in summarizing an essay or reporting a speech, the writer
