 
1
LAND LAW REFORM IN UGANDA: Exploring the loose ends 
By Anthony C.K. Kakooza* 
 
Abstract 
This paper addresses the present composition of land laws in Uganda and the 
need for reform. It does not particularly provide a critique on each of the land 
law legislations neither does it particularly focus on case law principles on the 
same, a venture which is quite lengthy, to say the least. It however attempts to 
highlight the pertinent concerns on the most notorious provisions under some of 
the prevalent land law legislations which can and should be simplified for the 
convenience of the public. It also provides a doorway for new legislations and 
regulations that can be harmonized within the present land laws with a view of 
bringing the general land law up to date with the present concerns. 
 
The Paper thus serves the general purpose of convincing on the need to 
harmonize or replace archaic and sometimes discordant land sector laws, so as to 
bring them in line with the new legal order and thus to implement the new 
constitutional provisions for protection of land and property rights. 
 
Introduction. 
Land is every household’s most important asset. Under Article 237 of the 1995 
Constitution, its states: “Land in Uganda belongs to the citizens of Uganda and 
                                                 
* LL.B (Hons) (M.U), Dip. L.P (LDC), LL.M (Warwick), Advocate and Lecturer in Law. A paper 
presented at the Uganda Christian University Law Society Workshop on the theme, “The Future of Uganda  
in the Legal, Political and Social Spheres”, dated 18th January 2008. The writer is presently a sub-
consultant and Research Associate with M/s Kalenge, Bwanika, Kimuli Advocates, as part of the on-going 
project on “The Review of the Legal Framework for Land Administration” for the Private Sector 
Foundation, Uganda & the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. As such, in addition to his 
own material, the writer has also made reference to a compilation of research from other Consultants on the 
project, notably Prof. Peter Butt, Dr. John Mugambwa, Mr. Robert Ssawa, Dr. Moses Musinguzi and Mr. 
Peter Walubiri among others. 
 

 
2
shall vest in them in accordance with the land tenure systems provided for in this 
Constitution”1. 
 
The same article goes on to provide for the general exceptions under which the 
aforementioned right of ownership may be curtailed2 and mentions the land 
tenure systems under which land can be owned in Uganda3. These are: 
Customary; freehold; mailo; and leasehold. 
 
Following the passing of the Constitution of Uganda, 1995, and the Land Act, 
19984, and with the development of the Land Sector Strategic Plan 2001-2011 
(LSSP), the insecurity of property rights that can arise from inappropriate or 
unclear legislation was addressed by Government.  The pertinent issues are now 
within the premise of: 
 
• non-existent or ambiguous land records; and  
• the inability to enforce existing land rights. 
 
Today, the most commonly referred to legislations in land law practice and 
conveyance matters are the Registration of Titles Act5, the Land Act6 and the 
Mortgage Act7. This is principally because the interests pertaining to the 
aforementioned tenure systems are mainly addressed in these laws, though 
inevitably, the same interests cut across all the other relevant laws, such as the 
Land Acquisition Act8 and the Survey Act9. Loopholes and uncertainties in these 
laws adversely affect, inter alia, business competitiveness, private sector 
                                                 
1 Sub-article 1, article 237 
2 Sub-article 2 
3 Sub-article 3 
4 Chapter 227, Laws of Uganda, Revised Edition, 2000, as amended by the Land (Amendment) Act No.1 of 
2004 
5 Cap. 230, Laws of Uganda, 2000 Ed. 
6 Supra, note 5 
7 Cap. 229, Laws of Uganda, 2000 Ed. 
8 Cap. 226 
9 Cap. 232 

 
3
development, and Uganda’s economic life in general.  This paper thus mainly 
focuses on the Registration of Titles Act (R.T.A) and advocates for a modification 
and harmonizing of this law with the Land Act and the Mortgage Act because the 
Register of titles which is regulated by the R.T.A, is currently the main record and 
source of land information. Limited reference will also be made to the impending 
amendments to the Land Act and the Mortgage Act since these are still subject to 
further debate. 
 
It should further be noted, that Uganda is presently experiencing an inefficient title 
registration system characterized by poor administration and maintenance. The 
inadequate security of the physical files has paved way for fraudulent and corrupt 
activity negatively affecting the integrity of the title registry. Such challenging 
factors in the land registry derail proper verification of the status of the land which 
inevitably affects the ability to sell the land and associated real estate. 
Furthermore, financial institutions also find it difficult to transact with 
unsatisfactory land interests presented as collateral10. 
 
This paper therefore specifically addresses a few common aspects in the 
Registration of Titles Act, the Land Act and the Mortgage Act, and attempts at 
offering suggestions as to how these laws can be modified to create better 
harmony and practical convenience in land law matters. 
 
Overview of the law and the need for reform 
The Registration of Titles Act, Cap. 230, has been in force in Uganda since 1924 
and is based on a 1915 Statute from the Australian State of Victoria. It is a “Torrens 
Title” Statute, that is, it reflects the underpinning concept of State-guaranteed title 
                                                 
10 Project Appraisal Document on a Proposed Credit to the Government of Uganda for a Second Private Sector 
Competitiveness 
Project, 
Report 
Number: 
29639-UG, 
dated 
July 
7,2004 
available 
at 
http://go.worldbank.org/T8HCFC4KC0 
or 
at 
http://www-
wds.worldbank.org/external/default/main  (last visited 8/7/07) 
 

 
4
(usually called “indefeasibility of title”)11. This is a stagnant law that needs to be 
modified and brought up to date with Torrens statutes in other jurisdictions. As 
we focus on harmonizing this law inter alia, with the Land Act and the Mortgage 
Act, areas requiring modification include the following: 
 
(a) 
Computerization 
The Register is kept entirely in manual form as reflected in the Act. However, with 
due consideration to the technology age we are in, our land laws, particularly the 
Registration of Titles Act, need to be amended to cater for technological progress 
such as paperless conveyance, on-line transactions and searches, and lodging of 
documents electronically.  This would allow for the development of a 
comprehensive Land Information System as well as help to curb down on 
fraudulent practices in the Land Registry as shall be discussed further below. The 
development of an integrated Land Information System (LIS) which combines all 
major land-related information would go at great lengths in simplifying the 
operation of the Land Registry. 
 
(b) 
 Decentralization of the Land Registry 
Another consideration is the amendment of the Registration of Titles Act or in the 
alternative, coming up with new legislation on land to cater for the 
decentralization of the land registry. This would involve dislocating it from a few 
central locations and having it strategically located in various localities. This, as a 
government policy, should obviously bear in mind challenges in management and 
coordination. However, with a well established and coordinated Land 
Information System, this obstacle would be easily overcome. Implementing this 
recommendation would make accessibility to the registry easier by the poorer 
members of the community for whom basic costs and transport are important 
issues.  
 
                                                 
11 Section 64, Registration of Titles Act, Cap.230 

 
5
(c) 
Addressing fraud in the operation of the land registry 
Incidences of fraud are every land law practitioner’s worst nightmare. The two 
most common incidences are illustrated below: 
 
• 
Situation 1: A person acquires an interest in land by means of their own 
fraud.  To illustrate: assume that A is the registered proprietor of land.  Now 
assume that X steals A’s certificate of title, then forges A’s signature on a transfer of 
the land in favour of himself (X) and then becomes registered as proprietor of the 
land.  In this situation, the Registration of Titles Act does not guarantee X’s title: A 
may set it aside on the ground of X’s fraud12. 
 
• 
Situation 2: An innocent person acquires an interest in land by means of the 
fraud of a third party.  To illustrate: assume that A is the registered proprietor of 
land.  Now assume that a third party (X) steals A’s certificate of title, impersonates 
A to sell the land to B who is ignorant of the fraud, and then forges A’s signature 
on a transfer in favour B, who becomes registered.  Here, the Registration of Titles 
Act guarantees B’s title. A cannot set it aside13. 
 
The result in Situation 1 is straightforward, and accords with justice and common 
sense.  X cannot acquire a good title by means of his or her own fraud.  By way of 
distinguishing, this was discussed in the case of John Katarikawe v W. 
Katwiremu & Ors14 in which it was held that: If a person procures registration to 
defeat an existing unregistered interest on the part of another person of which he 
is proved to have knowledge, then such a person is guilty of fraud. 
 
However, the result in Situation 2 is more controversial.  Someone must lose out 
because of X’s fraud: but is it to be A or B?  Over the years, courts have come to 
different conclusions.   
                                                 
12 Sections 176 & 177 R.T.A 
13 Sec. 181, R.T.A 
14 (1977) H.C.B 187 

 
6
In the case of F. Zaabwe v Orient Bank Ltd, Mars Trading Co. Ltd & Ors15, 
while addressing the issue of a purchaser bona fide or not vis-a vis third party 
rights, the Court pointed out two underlying principles. Katureebe, JSC, for 
instance, followed the decision in David Sejjaka Nalima v Rebecca Musoke16, to 
the effect that: The principle that a bonafide purchaser for value cannot have his 
transfer defeated by fraud only applies where the purchaser was not a party to the 
fraud or he had no knowledge of the fraud at the time when he purchased. 
 
In the Zaabwe case, the first defendants’ Counsel had full knowledge of the 
dispute and the allegations of fraud on the suit property. The Honourable 
Katureebe, JSC thus stated: “The Sejjaka case supra, is authority for the principle 
that where an Advocate acts for a party and he has knowledge or notice of alleged 
fraud, that knowledge or notice will be imputed to his client unless the client 
himself is defrauded by the advocate”. 
 
(d) The need for effective compensation for loss of land 
Most Torrens title statutes provide that persons who lose land, or an interest in 
land, through the workings of the registration system, should have access to 
statutory compensation17.  Often, the compensation is payable out of a statutory 
fund, called the “Assurance Fund”.  The right to compensation is seen as an 
important parallel to “immediate” indefeasibility of title.  The following example 
illustrates the need for compensation: 
 
Assume that A is the registered proprietor.  X steals A’s certificate of title and 
forges A’s signature on a transfer of the land in favour of B, an innocent 
purchaser.  B pays the full purchase price to X, who then disappears.  B 
registers and obtains an (immediately) indefeasible title.  A has lost the land.  
Technically, A has an action against X, but X has disappeared.  A has no action 
                                                 
15 Supreme Court Civil Appeal No. 4 of 2006 
16 SCCA 12/85 [1992]V KALR 
17 Sec. 178, R.T.A 

 
7
against B.  Therefore, under standard Torrens title provisions, A can recover 
from the Assurance Fund the value of the land under a scheme of statutory 
compensation. 
 
The Registration of Titles Act has a series of sections that, together, would give A 
rights to recover from the Government: sections 178, 179, 180, 183-187.  This 
equates to a right to recover from a “fund”.  However, these provisions appear 
excessively complex and (in some respects) unclear in their operation.  This can 
undermine confidence in the land registration system, for a person deprived of 
land by fraud is uncertain of the right to compensation. 
 
It can therefore be argued that in order to underpin confidence in Uganda’s title 
registration system, the compensation provisions of the Registration of Titles Act 
should be redrafted in order to free up access to compensation and to make clear 
the circumstances in which claims can be made.   
 
The assumption is that one reason why people do not make claims for 
compensation is because they believe that it is only through court proceedings that 
they can effect recovery.  This belief is not entirely correct, as section 186 (R.T.A) 
allows the Registrar (if the Minister agrees) to pay a claim before court action is 
initiated.   
 
However, in order to expedite the process and cut on the bureaucracies, the 
Registration of Titles Act should be amended to allow the Registrar to pay claims, 
without needing Ministerial approval.  It should not be necessary for parties to 
bear the costs or suffer the delays in court proceedings for recovery.  The Office of 
the Registrar should be given the confidence to exercise the expertise in deciding 

 
8
on claims.  Where this expertise is abused, there would remain the right under the 
existing Act to challenge the Registrar’s decision in court18. 
 
(e) Registered interests vis-à-vis unregistered interests 
This is a controversial issue that cuts across the Registration of Titles Act, Mortgage 
Act and the Land Act. A few practical examples would suffice: 
 
• Example 1: Assume that the owner of land (A) has given a mortgage to a 
lender (B).  Assume that the mortgage is unregistered, and that B has not 
protected the mortgage by caveat or by taking possession of the certificate 
of title.  Now assume that A sells the land to a purchaser (P), who has 
notice of the mortgage.  P becomes registered.  Does P take free of the 
mortgage?   
 
• Example 2’: Assume that the owner of land (A) enters into a contract to sell 
the land to a purchaser, P, who does not register or lodge a caveat.  Now 
assume that the owner then enters into a contract to sell the same land to 
another purchaser, Q.  Assume that Q knows of P’s interest.  Q becomes 
registered.  Does Q take free of P’s interest?  
 
Some Ugandan case law would hold that in examples such as these, the registered 
interest would defeat the unregistered.  Specifically, they would hold that in 
Example 1, P takes free of B’s interest, and that in Example 2, Q takes free of P’s 
interest.  The reasoning is that, under the Registration of Titles Act, a registered 
interest defeats an unregistered interest, despite notice—and that to take with 
notice of an unregistered interest is not to act fraudulently (as the term “fraud” is 
understood in the context of Torrens title statutes).19  But other Ugandan case law 
would hold to the contrary: namely, that in Example 1, P takes subject to B’s 
                                                 
18 See Sec. 185 R.T.A 
19  
An example is Shah v Modern Sweet Mart Ltd (1956-1957) 8 ULR 99, discussed in Mugambwa, 
Principles of Land Law in Uganda, Fountain Publishers, 2000, p 76. 

 
9
interest and in Example 2, Q takes subject to P’s interest.  This is based on the 
reasoning that registration in the face of knowledge of an unregistered interest is 
fraudulent.20 
 
In the appreciation of legal interests versus equitable interests, I would argue that 
the former view is correct.  That is, a registered interest defeats an unregistered 
interest, despite notice.  Specifically, to become registered as the holder of an 
interest with notice of an existing unregistered interest is not to act fraudulently 
(as the term “fraud” is understood in the context of Torrens title statutes).   This 
result is compelled by section 136 of the Registration of Titles Act. 
 
Furthermore, it is evident that this result not only accords with the philosophy of 
the Torrens system but also helps promote a confident land market.  The Torrens 
title system assumes that persons will register the interests they acquire in land—or 
else take the risk of losing out at the hands of a later interest-holder who becomes 
registered (even with notice).  One of the system’s strengths is the premise that 
persons acquiring an interest in land should be able to rely on the Register as a 
“mirror” of the title: that is, they should be able to assume that the land is bound 
only by the interests currently registered or caveated, and therefore ascertainable 
by search of the Register.  They should not be bound by interests that are 
unregistered or uncaveated—and which, by definition, are not ascertainable by 
search of the Register.  In short, they should not be concerned about unregistered 
interests whose holders have not sought the protection of registration or caveat.   
 
Therefore, the considered view is one of exercising due diligence. In other words, 
under the Registration of Titles Act a person taking an interest in land should be 
expected to register it, to avoid losing out to someone who later acquires a 
                                                 
20  
An early example is Katarikawe v Katwiremu [1977] HCB 187.   This seems now to be the 
approach taken generally: for example, see per Odoki CJ and other members of the Supreme 
Court, in Kampala District Land Board v N.H.C.C (Civil Appeal No 2 of 2004). Also see sec. 64 
(1) R.T.A 

 
10
registered interest in the land.  The unregistered holder’s remedy lies in their own 
hands: they can register21.  Of course, some interests are inherently unregistrable; 
and other interests, though inherently registrable, might be embodied in 
documents that, for one reason or another, are not in registrable form22.  But such 
interests can always be protected by caveat—a protection which, though not 
equivalent to registration, is sufficient to prevent extinction of the interest as a 
result of registration of a competing interest through exercise of due diligence by 
someone intending to register his or her interest on the land.   
 
This result, of course, would not affect the operation of the principles relating to 
fraud.  If the later interest holder has been fraudulent in acquiring the interest, 
then their registered title is liable to defeasance for fraud.  But, as section 136 of 
the Registration of Titles Act states, notice, of itself, is not fraud.  Nor would the 
result affect the principles relating to “personal equities”.  That is, if the later 
holder has engaged in unconscionable conduct of a kind that would lead a court 
to require his or her title to be subject to an earlier unregistered interest, then 
registration of the later interest will not destroy the earlier.   But subject to such 
matters, section 136 of the Registration of Titles Act should be allowed free reign.  
It is central to the aim of encouraging a confident land market. 
However, this argument leaves vulnerable persons unprotected. Uganda has seen 
a proliferation of unregistered interests, whose owners will know little or nothing 
of the need to register or caveat to protect the interests from defeat at the hands 
of later registered holders. Such vulnerable persons fall within or include the 
bracket of the so-called “bibanja” owners and other customary land owners 
constituting over 60% of land holders in Uganda. 
                                                 
21 Lawful and bonafide occupants on land (tenants by occupancy) can also register their interests under the 
provision of section 38 of the Land Act. 
22 Such as Land bequeathed through the registered proprietor’s last will and testament. 

 
11
However, it is impossible to protect all "vulnerable" persons; if we tried to do so, 
the Registration of Titles Act and the Land Act would become unworkable, to the 
detriment of persons dealing in land and to Uganda's land market. There must be 
a balance between competing interests (ie, between dealers or potential land 
dealers and other claimants). 
The "numerous" unregistered interests include interests of "bona fide" and "lawful 
occupants" under sec. 29 of the Land Act. There are new proposals under the Land 
(Amendment) Bill23 to protect such interests on registered land.   However, and 
importantly, those interests are already protected as exceptions to indefeasibility 
under the amendments to section 64 of the Registration of Titles Act proposed by 
the 2005 amending legislation24.  Similarly the rights in relation to “family land” 
are protected under the new section 64(3), inserted by the same amending 
legislation (Family land is also protected in the Mortgage Bill, 2007 discussed 
below).  
Furthermore, the aforementioned provisions in the proposed Land (Amendment) 
Bill seem to contradict the provisions of sections 64 and 136 of the Registration of 
Titles Act in as far as the estate of the registered proprietor is concerned. Much as 
the Land Act would seem to override the Registration of Titles Act, this is 
nevertheless likely to cause unnecessary public confusion. 
(f) 
The need for spousal consent in dealings with family land 
This is also yet another contentious issue. Recent amendments proposed to the 
Registration of Titles Act (by the Registration of Titles (Amendment) Bill 2005) 
introduce a requirement for spousal consent to dealings with family land.  These 
amendments affect, inter alia, the following sections of the Registration of Titles 
Act: 
• section 92 (no transfer of family land without spousal consent) 
                                                 
23 Bill No. 27 of 2007 
24 The Registration of Titles (Amendment) Bill, 2005 

 
12
• sections 101 and 109 (no lease or sublease of family land without spousal 
consent) 
• sections 115 and 129 (no mortgage, including equitable mortgage, of family 
land without spousal consent) 
 
These amendments were presumably made with section 39 of the Land Act in 
mind.  However, there are some important differences between section 39 and 
the relevant provisions of the Registration of Titles Act.  In particular: 
 
• section 39 (as amended)25 protects a much wider category of persons than 
merely spouses (eg, it protects dependent children of majority age; and in 
some circumstances protects minors and orphans); 
• Section 39 expressly makes transactions without consent void, even in 
favour of innocent purchasers; whereas the Registration of Titles Act is 
silent on the effect of the absence of consent.26 
 
Again, as aforementioned, the assumption is that given the importance of the 
Land Act in Ugandan social and legislative history, if an inconsistency occurs 
between the provisions of the Land Act and the provisions of the Registration of 
Titles Act, the Land Act was intended to prevail.  Accordingly, the law should be 
streamlined to avoid the apparent conflict in relation to spousal consent within 
the two laws and to ensure that the provisions of the Land Act are paramount. 
 
Section 39 of the Land Act also places mortgages in a special realm as far as 
spousal consent is concerned27. It is on the strength of this provision that her 
Lordship Justice Arach Amoko rejected the Respondent’s claim to an equitable 
                                                 
25  
The Land (Amendment) Act, No. 1 of 2004  
26  
Under normal Torrens title principles, an innocent purchaser under a transaction where consent 
appeared to have been given but was not in fact given (eg, where a spouse’s consent was obtained 
by deception or duress, or where a person impersonated the spouse), would take free of the need 
for consent: see, eg, Boyd v Mayor of Wellington [1924] NZLR 1174. 
27 See sub Section 3 thereof 

 
13
interest in the suit property in the case of Sentongo Producers & Coffee 
Farmers Ltd v Rose Nakafuma Muyiisa28. The Respondent had claimed an 
equitable interest on the suit property on the basis of having contributed money 
and materials for the construction of the house thereon. The Court’s holding was 
to the effect that the restrictions on land transfer under section 39 of the Land Act 
do not affect a legal mortgage and secondly, that co-ownership can not be 
conferred by marriage.  
 
As a further comment on this issue, I would add that the Mortgage Bill, which was 
drafted partly in response to the recommendations of the Uganda Law Reform 
Commission29, is yet to be passed in Parliament.  However, the Commission had 
recommended, in part30, that section 39 of the Land Act be amended to provide 
for co-ownership of family land.  
 
It is understandable that the rationale behind this recommendation is to protect 
the rights of women to land interests and avoid court decisions similar to that of 
Rose Nakafuma Muyiisa above and it is truly supported. However, it can be 
argued that this automatic co-ownership is impracticable. This is because it would 
introduce substantial complexity to land holdings.  It would import into the 
relationship between spouses the entire law of co-ownership—an area of law that 
is renowned for its complexity and difficulty.   As such, on the contrary, the 
spousal right to lodge a caveat, granted by section 39 of the Land Act, is sufficient 
protection. If a caveat is lodged, no mortgagee can claim to be ignorant of the 
need for consent; and under clause 5(2) of the Mortgage Bill, through due 
diligence, it is the mortgagee’s obligation to satisfy itself whether a prospective 
mortgagor has a spouse or not.  
 
                                                 
28   HC MSC No. 690 of 1999 
29  Study Report on Reform of the Laws Relating to Mortgage Transactions (U Law Reform Commission 
Publication No 22 of 2004) 
30 Ibid, Commission recommendation No. 12 

 
14
(g) 
Creating a general property law statute outside the Registration of Titles 
Act 
Most jurisdictions with Torrens title registration principles comparable to those in 
Uganda separate the registration of titles legislation from general property law 
legislation.  This makes for a convenient division of subject-matter: the Torrens 
statute deals with the registration of interests in land, while the general property 
law statute (or statutes, for often there is more than one) deals with more 
technical and discrete property law principles.  A reader who wants to find out 
about the registration of title goes to the registration of titles Act; but a reader 
who wants to find out about more general and underlying principles relating to 
land—such as the general principles regulating leases, mortgages, easements, 
covenants, and the like—goes to the general property statute. 
 
Unusually, the Ugandan Registration of Titles Act covers both registration of title 
and general property law issues.  This makes it a large, complex and somewhat 
unwieldy statute, and one that needs to be amended every time an amendment is 
desired to any of the “general” property law issues it covers.  Streamlining the 
legislation, by stripping out general property law provisions, would make it easier 
to amend—as well as easier to use. 
 
Apparently, the process of stripping-out is already happening.  For example, the 
Mortgage Decree (1974), while it existed, regulated some aspects of mortgage 
law. More recently, the Mortgage Bill takes from the Registration of Titles Act 
almost all of the general provisions regulating mortgages and puts them into a 
stand-alone mortgage statute. Likewise, the Uganda Law Reform Commission’s 
recent work on landlord and tenant law is likely to lead to a “stand-alone” code 
of landlord and tenant law, divorced from the registration of titles legislation. 
 
Conclusion: 
As mentioned at the onset, there are a variety of land laws that need to be 

 
15
addressed to bring them into conformity with the Constitution and the Land Act. 
This paper can not exhaustively cover all these laws. However, an appreciation 
needs to be made of the fact that even the constant amendments made to the 
most significant laws, that is, the Registration of Titles Act, the Land Act and the  
Mortgage Act, should be in line with the “needs” of the people of Uganda and 
not necessarily their “wants”. The laws should also be drafted so as to ensure that 
all interests are taken care of in a balanced and convenient manner. 
 

 
16
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Text Books 
J. Mugambwa, Principles of Land Law in Uganda, Fountain Publishers, 2000. 
 
Law Reports 
1. Project Appraisal Document on a proposed credit to the Government of 
Uganda for a Second Private Sector Competitiveness Project. Report No. 
29639 
–UG, 
dated 
July 
7th, 
2004 
available 
at 
http://go.worldbank.org/T8HCFC4KC0 
or 
at 
http://www-
wds.worldbank.org/external/default/main  (last visited 8/7/07) 
 
2. Study Report on Reform of the Laws Relating to Mortgage Transactions (U 
Law Reform Commission Publication No 22 of 2004) 
 
Supreme law and Statutory Law 
1. The Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995 
 
2. The Land Act, Cap. 227, Laws of Uganda, 2000 Ed. as amended by the 
Land (Amendment) Act No. 1 of 2004  
 
3. The Registration of Titles Act, Cap. 230, Laws of Uganda, 2000 Ed. 
 
4. The Mortgage Act, Cap. 229 Laws of Uganda (2000) 
 
5. The Land Acquisition Act, Cap. 226 (2000) 
 
6. The Survey Act, Cap. 232 (2000) 
 
Bills considered: 
1. The Land Amendment Bill, No. 27 of 2007 
 
2. The Registration of Titles (Amendment) Bill, 2005 
 
Case Law 
1. Boyd v Mayor of Wellington [1924] NZLR 1174 
 
2. David Sejjaka Nalima v Rebecca Musoke SCCA 12/85 [1992]V KALR 
 
3. F. Zaabwe v Orient Bank Ltd, Mars Trading Co. Ltd & Ors Supreme Court 
Civil Appeal No. 4 of 2006 
 
4. John Katarikawe v W. Katwiremu & Ors  (1977) H.C.B 187 
 
5. Kampala District Land Board v N.H.C.C (Civil Appeal No 2 of 2004) 
 

 
17
6. Sentongo Producers & Coffee Farmers Ltd v Rose Nakafuma Muyiisa, HC 
MSC No. 690 of 1999 
 
7. Shah v Modern Sweet Mart Ltd (1956-1957) 8 ULR 99 
 
 
