Understanding the cost of the road traffic accidents (RTAs) has been of interest to many
scholars and policy makers for a long time. In Uganda like many developing countries in

Africa, injuries due to motorcycle accidents represent a major but often neglected
emerging public health problem and contribute significantly to the overall road traffic
injuries. This research study therefore explored the costs of motorcycle accidents and
the pain, grief and sufferings of the motorcycle accident victims using a multi-method
approach. Unlike many studies on cost of accidents which use the traditional human
capital approach, this study in addition to the human capital approach, applied the
Willingness-to-pay (WTP) approach to estimate the cost of motorcycle accidents. WTP
method was used to estimate the value that boda boda riders would pay for reducing
the risk of loss of life based on Contingent Valuation (CV) method. We extend the
analysis to also explore the key coping mechanisms adopted by the Boda-boda riders
amidst the challenges the riders face when they suffer motorcycle accidents.
The data were obtained from multiple sources, including a survey of 1600 boda boda
cyclists in Kawempe and Central divisions in Kampala City, interviews with accident
victims and their immediate family members, traffic police records, hospitals and
national statistics on selected economic aggregates. The results show that motorcycle
accidents are associated with huge economic and non-economic burden borne by the
accident victims and the society as a whole. The study established that it costs
approximately 7 million shillings (or 2800 USD) to treat a boda boda accident victim who
is severely injured. Based on annual police statistics on motorcycle accidents for 2012;
the Ugandan economy losses more than UGX 3 billion (1.2m USD) value of output due
to days away from productive work as result of severe injuries and death. Likewise, the
cost of motorcycle repairs amounted to UGX 350 million (140,000 USD).

The study also estimated the value of preventing motorcycle accidents. The estimates
show that on average boda boda riders are willing to pay Ug Shs 222,550 (89 USD) a
year for a reduction in mortality risks associated with motorcycle accidents that translate
into UGX 4.45 billion (US$1.78m), the value of statistical life (VOSL). Overall, the
combined economic burden of the motorycle accidents (repairs, medical costs, lost
output and imputed cost of pain grief and suffering) were estimated to be approximately
US$ 3.6 million annually. This cost is about 0.02% of Uganda’s GDP in 2013. The key
policy implication of the study is that reducing motorcycle causalities and fatalities will
reduce social and economic sufferings of victims, unlock growth and free resources for
more productive use. The findings provide the cost-benefit analysis of any investment in
areas that will promote the prevention, treatment, care and management of motorcycle
accidents in Uganda.