THE IMPACT OF SUSTAINABLE PRODUCTION ON SUSTAIBALE CONSUPTION: THE CASE
OF COCACOLA COMPANY NAMANVE BRANCH














PATRON OSHABA
M21B12/011

A DISSERTATION SUBMITTED TO THE SCHOOL OF BUSINESS, IN PARTIAL
FULFILLMENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS FOR THE AWARD OF A DEGREE OF BACHELOR
OF PROCUREMENT AND LOGISTICS MANAGEMENT OF UGANDA CHRISTIAN
UNIVERSITY

June, 2024





DECLARATION
I, OSHABA PATRON hereby declare that this work is original and never has been submitted to
any other institution for a ward of any Degree. Where the work of others has been used, reference
has been made there of.

Signed: .................................... Date: .......................................
OSHABA PATRON






















APPROVAL
This report titled the impact of sustainable production on sustainable consumption, the case of
Coca-Cola Company Namanve branch has been submitted by OSHABA PATRON for
examination with my approval as the University Supervisor, and it’s now ready for presentation
for the award of a Bachelor’s degree of procurement and logistics management of Uganda
Christian University.
Signed: ...................................... Date: ......................................
MADAM TUMUHAMYE COMFORT























DEDICATION
I dedicate this piece of work to my mother Miss. NAMANYA BUTUNGI, my amazing brothers,
sisters, and friends at large that have been instrumental to my education life.




























ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
Above anyone, I want to thank the Almighty for how far He has brought me and for guiding me
throughout the process of creating this report, all glory and honour goes back to Him.
I extend a vote of thanks to a number of people who unreservedly, contributed towards the
accomplishment of this research work. I also would like to acknowledge the assistance and role
played by the following personalities to the successful completion of this study. I cannot say
exactly how grateful I am to my supervisor, MADAM TUMUHAMYE COMFORT, for her
guidance in this study was beyond measure. Thank you also for providing me with professional
advice, encouragement and your time that has spurred me to success. In the same way, I would
like to thank all the people at Coca-Cola Company, Namanve branch for the time they gave me as
without their input, this study would not have come to fruition. I cannot forget the efforts of the
staff of Uganda Christian University especially the lecturers at Faculty of Business and
Administration their input and effort that enabled me acquire the invaluable knowledge I currently
possess, their contribution can never be quantified but will always be reminiscent whenever I look
through this book.
Lastly, I thank my family for sacrificing the little they have and investing in my education and
enabling me to acquire this lifelong achievement.

May the Almighty God reward them all immensely.













TABLE OF CONTENT

DECLARATION1
APPROVAL2
DEDICATION3
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT4
TABLE OF CONTENT5
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS7
ABSTRACT8
CHAPTER ONE1
1.0 Introduction1
1.1 Background of the study1
1.2 Problem statement.3
1.3 General objective of the study3
1.4 Specific objectives3
1.5 Research questions3
1.6 Scope of the Study4
1.6.1 Content Scope4
1.6.2 Time Scope4
1.6.3 Geographical Scope4
1.7 Definition of key terms5
1.8 Conceptual frame work5
1.9 Significance of the study6
CHAPTER TWO: LITERATURE REVIEW7
2.0 Introduction7
2.1 The factors for achieving sustainable production8
2.2 The challenges encountered in implementing sustainable consumption10
2.3 The possible ways of ensuring sustainable production and sustainable consumption12
CHAPTER THREE: METHODOLOGY15
3.1 Introduction15
3.2 Research Design15
3.3 The Study Population15


3.4 Sample Size and Selection Technique15
3.5 Sampling Techniques16
3.6 Data Collection Methods17
3.6.1 The questionnaire method.17
3.7 Data Collection Instruments17
3.7.1 Self-Administered Questionnaire17
3.8. Data collection procedure17
3.9 Data Processing and analysis18
3.10 Data Analysis18
3.11 Limitations of the study18
CHAPTER FOUR19
PRESENTATION, ANALYSIS AND INTERPRETATION OF FINDINGS19
4.0 Introduction19
4.1 General characteristics of respondents.19
4.1.1 Gender of respondents19
4.1.2 Age of respondents20
4.1.3 Education level of the respondents20
4.2. The factors for achieving sustainable production21
4.3. The challenges encountered in implementing sustainable consumption24
4.4. The possible ways of ensuring sustainable production and sustainable consumption27
CHAPTER FIVE30
SUMMARY, CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS30
5.0 Introduction30
5.1 Summary of the Findings30
5.1.1 The factors for achieving sustainable production30
5.1.2 The challenges encountered in implementing sustainable consumption31
5.1.3 The possible ways of ensuring sustainable production and sustainable consumption31
5.2 Conclusion32
5.3 Recommendations33
5.4 Areas for further study34
REFERENCES34
APPENDIX 1 Questionnaire37


LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
UNEP

United Nations Environmental Programme
UN


United Nations
SCP

Sustainable Consumption and Production
10-YFP

10-Year Framework Programme
CP


Cleaner Production
SD


Sustainable development
SCM

Supply chain management
NGOs

National Governmental Organisation
KPMG

Klynveld peat Marwick Goerdeler
UGGDS

Uganda Green Growth Development Strategy
NEMA.

National Environmental Management Authority
SPSS

Statistical Package for the Social Sciences












ABSTRACT
The study investigated the impact of sustainable production on sustainable consumption. The
three research objectives that guided the study include the factors for achieving sustainable
production at Coca-Cola Company Namanve branch, analyse the challenges encountered in
implementing sustainable consumption at Coca-Cola Company Namanve branch and
suggesting possible ways of ensuring sustainable production and sustainable consumption at
Coca-Cola Company Namanve branch. The study employed a cross sectional research design
that was descriptive in nature, used to describe characteristics of the population and other
phenomenon studied. The researcher used both qualitative and quantitative. Quantitative data
was analysed using the Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS) computer program
to come up with the findings whereas qualitative data was analysed qualitatively. From the
study findings, the factors for achieving sustainable production include; resource efficiency
not only looks to minimize waste but also reduce exhaustion of non-renewable resources, Eco‐
efficiency not only aims to prevent waste and increase resource productivity but also to ensures
minimal impact towards ecology, Incorporation of green practices into supply chain
management activities can enable organizations meet goals associated with environmental and
social sustainability, Adopting low-carbon technologies can help reduce energy consumption
and promote sustainable development. , the study concluded that the possible ways of ensuring
sustainable production and sustainable consumption included; balancing the use of natural
resources can foster growth and the efficient use natural resources, Proper planning, inventory
management, sharing of surplus food, freezing of foodstuffs, feeding of scraps to animals and
being creative with leftovers are some of the ways to minimize food loss and waste. The study
recommended that There is need for strengthening awareness creation and trainings in the
areas of waste management like the application of circular models where waste is used as an
input as opposed to the current traditional linear model of take make and waste which being
applied in most manufacturing firms of Uganda. Knowledge generation through research
should go hand in hand with strategies to create the capacity to apply and roll out new
knowledge to promote the implementation of sustainability practices.




CHAPTER ONE
1.0 Introduction
This chapter looks at the background of the study, problem statement, purpose of the study,
objectives of the study, research questions, scope of the study, definition of key terms,
conceptual frame work and the significance of the study.
1.1 Background of the study
The means we live nowadays are unsustainable since far too numerous resources are consumed
than what the earth may redevelop. Nevertheless, it is significant to recognise the big gap in
consumption between rich and poor. Around 10% of the richer populaces of the world account
for approximately half of global greenhouse gas emissions in control for climate change
(UNEP, 2020). These unsustainable practices have backed the existing major environmental
crises like climate change, biodiversity loss and pollution (UN, 2020). This has two
implications: one being the urgent need for both social and ecological transformation; and two,
the need to address high levels of inequality.
Sustainable Consumption and Production (SCP) aims to minimize the negative environmental
impacts from consumption and production systems, considering all stages of the life-cycle of
products and services while promoting quality of life for all. Efforts concerning sustainable
consumption and production (SCP) have been crucial and prevalent during the past few
decades. Both business and governments have worked tirelessly to decouple economic growth
from the environmental degradation that has consistently accompanied it (UNEP, 2008). The
measures adopted and solutions implemented by the business world range from pollution
control to improved industrial efficiency (environmental resources exploited per unit of
output), reached through organizational measures and the adoption of new technologies.
Developed countries like China and Canada and international organizations have set up
programs, policies, and regulations targeted toward sustainability. The European Union, for
example, has adopted several new modes of communication and policy since the inception of
the Fifth Environmental Action Programme (European Commission 1992), encompassing
numerous conventions and protocols at the global and local levels, notably the Kyoto Protocol
(UNFCCC 1997).




Africa has been the area on the top for executing Sustainability production and consumption
and the unveiling of the African 10-Year Framework Programme (10-YFP) on Sustainable
Consumption and Production (SCP) confirmed the assurance to execute SCP activities in
Africa. The development of national and local SCP programmes in numerous African countries
has placed the ground for highlighting the importance of SCP in attaining sustainable
development in Africa, (Prosperity, 2019). The backing offered by the Marrakech Task Force
on Cooperation with Africa in endorsing SCP in the region displays that partnership is too vital
in attaining sustainable development and lessening of poverty in Africa.
Through inspiring countries to endorse Sustainable production and consumption technologies
of Agenda 21, the government of Uganda promoted for the introduction of better production
approaches through all crucial segments of the economy. The part of sustainable consumption
is gradually attracting thoughtfulness to the quality and safety parts of products in addition to
prices (Vergragt, 2013). Progressively, new people are nowadays giving attention to related
features plus labels, data sheets, chemical composition, product efficiency, and disposal after
use and impacts on the environment.
More sensitisation, capacity development and technical assistance is however still critical to
improve people’s appreciation of eco-labels and other certification systems. The identified
priority areas of the SCP Programme in Uganda are demonstration of Cleaner Production (CP)
effectiveness, information exchange and dissemination of technical information, and
harvesting and demand-side management of energy use were selecting for piloting (Hall,
(2011).
The coca cola company incorporated on September 5, 1919 is a beverage company. The
business imposes or licenses non-alcoholic drink brands, principally sparkling beverages and
variety of still beverages which include water, improved juices ready to drink teas and coffees
sports drink dairy and energy drinks. The company’s segments include Europe, Middle East
and East Africa; Latin America North America Asia among others. Due to such a large market
globally it therefore practices sustainability to meet the competitive advantage.






1.2 Problem statement.
Unsustainable patterns of consumption and production are root causes of triple environmental
crises of climate change, biodiversity loss and pollution. These crises and related
environmental degradation, threaten human well-being and achievement of sustainable
development goals. In spite of the increasing participation of government of Uganda and all
citizens working together to improve resource efficiency, reduce waste and pollution and shape
a new circular economy, little or no impact on the change of attitude and implementation of
sustainable production and sustainable consumption has been achieved (Shove, 2019). The
reasons for this mismatch remain largely unexplored and neither do we have empirical evidence
to explain them. Hence, the need to carry out this study to establish the cause for this mismatch.
1.3 General objective of the study
The general objective of the study was to investigate the impact of sustainable production on
sustainable consumption.
1.4 Specific objectives
The specific objectives of the study are;
i.
To assess the factors for achieving sustainable production at Coca-Cola company
Namanve branch.
ii.
To analyse the challenges encountered in implementing sustainable consumption at
Coca-Cola company Namanve branch
iii.
To suggest possible ways of ensuring sustainable production and sustainable
consumption at Coca-Cola company Namanve branch.
1.5 Research questions
i.
What are the factors for achieving sustainable production at Coca-Cola Company
Namanve branch?
ii.
What are the challenges encountered in implementing sustainable consumption at
iii.
What are the ways of ensuring sustainable production and sustainable consumption
at Coca-Cola Company Namanve branch?





1.6 Scope of the Study
1.6.1 Content Scope
The study investigated the impact of sustainable production and sustainable consumption. The
study then assessed the factors for achieving sustainable production at Coca-Cola Company
Namanve branch, analyse the challenges encountered in implementing sustainable
consumption at Coca-Cola Company Namanve branch and suggesting possible ways of
Namanve branch
1.6.2 Time Scope
The study considered a period of five years that is from 2018-2022 due availability of reliable
information of good quality that was obtained. The researcher considered a period of 5 months
as long enough to allow gathering of information, data collection and processing.
1.6.3 Geographical Scope
Geographically, the study was limited to the premises of Coca-Cola Namanve branch.
Namanve is an area in central Uganda, most of which lies in Kira municipality Wakiso district
with portions in Mukono municipality Mukono district. Namanve lies in Bweyogerere ward,
in south eastern Kira municipality, in Wakiso District, central Uganda.it is located
approximately 15 kilometres (9.3m), by road, east of downtown Kampala, Uganda capital and
largest city. Namanve is bordered by seta to the east, Namilyango to the south east, Lake
Victoria to the south, Kirinya to the south west and Bweyogerere to the west and North West.
Portions of Namanve lie within the boundaries of Mukono Town council.











1.7 Definition of key terms
Sustainability refers to the processes and actions through which humankind avoids the
depletion of natural resources to keep an ecological balance so that society’s quality of life
does not decrease. The integration of sustainability initiatives into organizational operations
derives from social pressures, stricter government policy, corporate image, growing public
awareness and market pressures.
Sustainable consumption refers to the use of products and services in ways that minimise
impacts on the environment in order for human needs to be met in the present but also for
future.
Sustainable production refers to the creation of goods and services using processes and
systems that are non-polluting, conserving of energy and natural resources, economically
viable, socially and creatively rewarding for all working people plus safe and healthful for
workers, communities and consumers.
1.8 Conceptual frame work












Source: Researcher’s personal conceptualisation through review of literature





Independent variable
Dependent variable
Sustainable production
Power consumption
Operational safety
Personal health
Production cost
Sustainable consumption
Waste management
Sustainable marketing
Sustainable procurement
Sustainable transport



1.9 Significance of the study
The study findings aimed at benefitting major stakeholders in the procurement field, namely
financiers, non-government organizations, institutions of higher learning (tertiary colleges and
universities) and the government in pursuing capacity enhancement policies for all categories
of enterprise operators. These are also for those involved in sustainable production and
sustainable consumption.
Policy makers and political leaders may also benefit from the study because findings could
guide them in prioritizing resource allocation. The study’s conclusions and recommendations
as a case of reference necessary in identifying the potential gaps will facilitate this.
The findings of the study may further act as reference data for other scholars/researchers.
To the researcher, the study would lead the researcher in obtaining bachelor’s degree of
business and administration of Uganda Christian University since it is one of the prerequisites
for the award.
Its findings will help the researcher to fully understand the underlying concepts of field
research very well including data collection, information compiling, gathering and analysis
skills. After gaining such skills, the researcher will ably carry out business research related
activities both on work and in personal consultancies.













CHAPTER TWO: LITERATURE REVIEW
This chapter dealt with the review of related literature on the study of the variables specifically
on investigating the impact of sustainable production and sustainable consumption. The study
then assessed the factors for achieving sustainable production at Coca-Cola Company
Namanve branch, analysed the challenges encountered in implementing sustainable
consumption at Coca-Cola Company Namanve branch and suggested possible ways of
Namanve branch.
2.0 Introduction
Sustainable Consumption and Production (SCP) can be defined as: a holistic approach to
minimising the negative environmental impacts from consumption and production systems
while promoting quality of life for all (Bhuiyan, 2015). Thus, while Sustainable Consumption
and Production (SCP) may mean different things to different people, it can generally be agreed
that SCP is about systemic change, decoupling economic growth from environmental
degradation and applying a lifecycle thinking approach that takes into consideration all phases
of resource use in order to do more and better with less. It has rightly been pointed out that a
major challenge in environmental policymaking is determining whether and how fast our
society should adopt sustainable management methods as these decisions may have long lasting
effects on the environment.
In the 1970s, the scientific community began to realize that unsustainable development was
leading toward environmental and economic collapse. This warning is also known as “limits
to growth”, which was proposed by the Club of Rome, (Southerton, 2018). After decades of
economic development, sustainable development (SD) is assumed to be an attempt “without
alternative” for the survival of humankind (Geels, 2018). As a predominant goal and crucial
necessity for establishing SD, the integration of consumption and production systems with SD
was formulated and implemented (Spaargaren,2019). The concern over sustainable
consumption and production (SCP) patterns has been elevated to an unprecedented level and
has gained international prominence. A series of international conferences related to on-going
climate changes and SCP matters have been held. The Johannesburg Plan of Implementation
in 2002 called for all countries to promote SCP patterns with the developed countries taking
the lead and with all countries benefiting from the process, and a decade later, the United
Nations Conference on Sustainable Development (Rio+20) reaffirmed that SCP was a
cornerstone of SD, proposing a 10-Year Framework of Programmes on SCP patterns.


2.1 The factors for achieving sustainable production
Waste minimisation is frequently mentioned in sustainability strategies. Committing to
minimise waste is recognised as desirable in managing resources. Waste minimisation is
described as ‘the reduction of waste’ at source recognising that is cheaper not to produce waste
in the first place. Waste minimisation covers activities aimed at reducing wastes from raw
material and ingredient use, product loss, water consumption and effluent generation, paper
and packaging, factory and office consumables, energy consumption, all other solid, liquid and
gaseous wastes, and wasted effort (Akenji, 2014).
Supply chain management (SCM) involves the flow of goods and services from origin to
consumption, aiming to reduce costs, improve quality, and foster product innovation. As
environmental concerns grow, manufacturers are adopting green practices in SCM to meet
environmental and social goals. Barber (2003) suggests that green supply chain management
can enhance company performance, competitiveness, and meet stakeholders' demands for
environmental protection, aligning with Berg's (2011) findings that enterprises face pressure
from stakeholders, including NGOs, to integrate social and environmental issues into SCM.
Resource efficiency also called resource productivity, has received much attention recently
because it is not only focused on managing resources as a whole rather than being limited to
one stage of the resource's life, such as waste minimisation and pollution prevention which
centred the focus on waste (cause) and its polluting effect but also on reducing the consumption
of primary materials without affecting the level of output qualitatively. The UK government
actively promotes resource efficiency as a part of its sustainable development policy (Bilen,
2008). This strategy aims to efficiently use and reduce the flow and consumption of resources
from nature (Hukkinen, 2011). Unlike past approaches, resource efficiency considers the entire
lifecycle of resources, focusing on waste reduction, resource conservation, and
environmentally-friendly production processes (Brizga, 2014). By curbing resource extraction
and emissions, the government aims to reduce environmental damage and exhaustion nonrenewable resources.
External pressure as in recent years as enterprises have been increasingly influenced by the
pressure from governments, international standards and their communities regarding both
environmental and social issues to the extent that current measures of organizational
competitiveness have changed from managing costs to sustainability. According to previous
studies, external pressure is divided into two parts, namely, regulatory pressure and
stakeholder’s pressure. Regulatory pressure from international and domestic regulations are


influencing various industries to adopt and prioritize sustainable manufacturing processes,
urging them to implement green practices, (Burja, 2009) for example the Montreal Protocol
(1987), Kyoto Protocol (1997) and ISO standards. Stakeholders play a crucial role in
encouraging companies to adopt sustainable manufacturing practices and engage in process
and product innovation. Pressure from stakeholders in the supply chain can lead companies to
become more sustainability-conscious, prompting the establishment of sustainability goals and
practices in response to stakeholder demands (Ward, 2007; Cohen, 2010).
Eco‐efficiency is the broadest strategy, because it not only aims to prevent waste and increase
resource productivity but also to ensure minimal impact towards ecology while improving the
quality of life all without exceeding Earth's limits, (Chang, 2013). Thus, it is bigger in scope,
covering economic, social and ecological dimensions, and is not limited to the company itself.
Eco‐efficiency is a management philosophy, which encourages business to search for
environmental improvement while at the same time giving social and economic benefits by
fostering innovation, growth and competitiveness. Eco‐efficiency can be viewed from many
levels and is basically a call to achieve more value added from resources input with reduced
emissions and waste.
The adoption of sustainable reporting has become widespread among major companies
worldwide. Over 80% of S&P 500 firms reported on sustainability in 2015, up from 20% in
2011. Around 73% of the top 100 companies in 45 countries surveyed by KPMG also reported
on corporate responsibility. While many reference sustainability reporting guidelines, less than
half have their corporate responsibility information independently verified, (Vandenbergh,
2019). The rise in sustainable reporting is driven by increasing demand from investors and
governments. By 2016, over 50 countries had regulations or policies encouraging or requiring
sustainability reporting by organizations.
Energy management is crucial due to the negative environmental impacts of fossil fuels.
Adopting low-carbon technologies and reducing dependence on energy suppliers can help
reduce energy consumption and promote sustainable development (Tihanyi, 2016). As climate
change intensifies, companies are facing external pressures from regulations to reduce their
carbon footprint and emissions. Additionally, the increasing energy demand in developing
countries has led to higher energy costs and shortages, making it a pressing issue to address.
However, these challenges also provide motivation for the manufacturing industry to


implement practices that reduce greenhouse gas emissions and energy consumption (Shaw,
(2011).
Process design can decrease energy consumption, waste emissions, and production costs while
optimizing resource usage. It also reduces the impact of toxic waste on the environment,
leading to better manufacturing flexibility and product quality. Strategies like Lean Production
can enhance a company's competitiveness, as it positively correlates with environmental
performance by reducing pollution costs and strengthening overall environmental performance
(Pape, 2014).
2.2 The challenges encountered in implementing sustainable consumption
Excessive use of agrochemicals and overreliance on agriculture has rightly been pointed out as
the commercialization of horticulture farming, expansion of farms, and the practice of
monoculture favour the proliferation of pests, which in turn increases the need for pesticides.
Currently, due to agricultural industrialization, more and more farmers in Uganda and indeed
globally, are using agro-chemicals that is fertilizers and pesticides in their farms to deal with
pests and all other destructive insects as well as increasing productivity (Rau, 2014). These
agrochemicals lead to soil degradation, increased greenhouse gas emissions, pesticide
accumulation, and declining water availability and quality (Carragher, 2019). Additionally, the
indiscriminate use of chemical pesticides impacts soil texture, productivity, and poses risks to
the environment, human health, and non-target microorganisms.
Arguably, environmental unsustainability is due to both structural features and historically
specific characteristics of industrial capitalism resulting in specific patterns of production and
consumption, as well as population growth. Poverty has often contributed to unsustainable
production and consumption patterns and ultimately to environmental degradation in the
country (Seyfang, 2019). The poor depend much more on nature for their livelihoods than the
rich (Prothero, 2018) hence exhausting natural resources in the process, on top of that
sustainability tends to come at an expense and goods usually produced sustainably are too
expensive for most to afford.
Food wastage and losses at consumer and production levels as it has been noted that although
Sub-Saharan Africa faces severe food shortages, on one hand, it experiences high rates of
postharvest loss on the other, with an estimation that about 50% of fruits and vegetables, 20%
of cereals, pulses and legumes and 40% of roots and tubers are lost before they reach the
consumer (Freund ,2018). Thus, such wastage and loss not only leave the people hungry with


inadequate food to consume but also exerts undue pressure on the lands for higher production
of food to feed the ever-growing population.
Lack of e-waste management as according to the UN, e-waste is considered the fastest-growing
waste stream in the world with 44.7 million tonnes generated in 2016 and 50 million tonnes in
2018 thus the name 'tsunami of e-waste'. The increase in e-waste is mostly brought about by
exporting of e-waste to developing countries which lack technology to properly dispose of it,
planned obsolescence, the cost associated with repairs and ignorance, (McDonagh, 2017). With
this increase in e-waste, we see that there has been an increase in resource depletion, greenhouse gas emissions, soil contamination, water and air pollution.
A survey of 2,000 Americans revealed that 61 percent believe green goods perform poorly
compared to traditional products, citing issues like weak cleaning supplies and underpowered
electric cars as well as the cost associated to green goods in comparison to traditional goods,
(Overy, 2016). This negative perception of sustainability labels can create distrust and result in
consumers opting for less eco-friendly options. However, green brands have improved over
time and can now compete with traditional products. To address these biases, businesses should
read reviews and select brands that meet their standards while being mindful of the
environment. (Adams, 2016)
Limited retail availability or difficulty in finding sustainable and sweatshop-free options in
brick and mortar and mortar retail stores is a common and serious structural barrier. The
sustainable product assortment carried by the local Walmart, Target, or grocer is a mere
fraction compared to traditional product shelves, ranging from apparel, cleansers, makeup, and
produce. As demand for earth-conscious products goes up, they are more likely to go out of
stock at least until the corporations start to notice (Antunes, 2014). What’s more, businesses
and consumers may have trouble locating them in the store’s layout since certain products will
be categorized differently from the traditional item they are replacing. Overall, the dominating
retail environment can make it incredibly difficult and inconvenient to shop consciously,
(Stakeholder Forum, 2013).
Social norms and community standards are the primary determinants of our behaviour,
especially when it concerns the environment. Therefore, it can be one of the biggest barriers to
overcome, (Gilmer, 2019). If one’s family, friends, or co-workers are not concerned with their
impact on the environment or how their purchases affect workers overseas, it can be incredibly
tough to stick to individual goals (Byers 2019). On the other hand, having a community that


keeps one accountable is incredibly influential which is why it’s important to seek out likeminded people wherever one can and with online communities brightly growing every day, it
will not be hard to find a squad to cheer one on.
Lack of awareness for sustainable options or knowledge of what products to purchase and
actions to take can be paralyzing (Sedlacko, 2014). This applies not only to consumers but to
businesses and policy makers as consumers often lack understanding of the environmental and
social impacts of their consumption choices, leading to unsustainable behaviours, most
companies may not be fully aware of the potential benefits, cost savings, and market
advantages associated with sustainable production, the lack of awareness of policymakers
about the urgency of sustainability issues can delay or hinder the implementation of effective
regulations and policies. What we don’t know can hurt the planet, and the only cure for not
knowing is reading, listening to informational podcasts, watching climate change
documentaries, and reading up on favourite brands’ manufacturing processes to see if they
align with sustainable values (Simpson, 2020).).
It’s an extreme privilege to have the time, knowledge, and financial resources to practice proenvironmental production and consumption behaviours. While a growing number of
consumers are willing to pay a premium price for products with a moral cause, we must
recognize that not everyone is in a comfortable position to do so, (Phipps, 2020). Even if the
item’s production process is not ideal, it’s hard to refuse a bargain or store-brand item that
doesn’t break the bank. Financial constraints pose a significant challenge for individuals,
businesses, and governments looking to adopt sustainable practices as the cost of sustainable
products and services are higher than conventional alternatives, making them less accessible to
consumers and businesses with limited financial means (Bessant, 2016). However, the extra
price associated with quality and ethically-made apparel can actually pay off in the long run.
2.3 The possible ways of ensuring sustainable production and sustainable consumption
Balancing the use of natural resources to foster growth encourages the efficient use and
sustainable management of natural resources. The difference between national production and
consumption, the policy-induced change in a country's wealth is measured by adjusted net
savings. This considers investment in human capital, depreciation of fixed capital, depletion of
natural resources, and pollution damage (Noble, 2017). Consistently negative saving rates
indicate diminishing wealth and unsustainable development. Positive savings form the basis
for future growth.


Minimizing food loss and waste is crucial and involves addressing decreases in food quantity
and quality at all stages of the supply chain. This problem is evident not only in our homes but
especially in catering companies that waste unconsumed food daily due to excessive production
(Gaffney, 2017). To combat this issue, we need to encourage proper planning, inventory
management, sharing of surplus food, freezing of foodstuffs, feeding of scraps to animals,
being creative with leftovers and initiatives like the Food Reform for Sustainability and Health
project aim to develop intelligent solutions and foster partnerships in the restaurant sector to
support a healthy population and planet (Nair, 2011).
Encourage e-waste management which aims to reduce the amount of electronic waste by
focusing on end-of-life practices. To minimize e-waste, we need to raise awareness of its
improper management in developing countries, promote the purchase of energy star rated
electronics from companies that encourage buy-backs, and emphasize recycling, repair, and
repurposing of equipment (Bengtsson, 2014). Governments should also implement export
limits to ensure that exported e-waste is matched with an equal quantity of recycled or reused
materials in various countries as in 2019, the world generated a staggering 53.6 Mt of e-waste,
with Asia producing the highest amount at 24.9 Mt, followed by the Americas (13.1 Mt) and
Europe (12 Mt), while Africa and Oceania generated 2.9 Mt and 0.7 Mt, respectively (Global
E-waste Monitor 2020).
Development, implementation and enforcing of various strategic legal, policy, and institutional
frameworks that promote sustainability. Uganda's commitment to green growth and sustainable
development is evident through the 1995 Uganda constitution, the Uganda vision 2040, the
UGGDS and recently the Switch Africa Green project which Uganda is implementing and
coordinating through NEMA. It is one thing to develop and implement various strategic legal,
policy, and institutional frameworks that promote sustainability and it is another to enforce and
reinforce them as enforced regulations can compel businesses to integrate environmentally
friendly technologies, reduce pollution, and minimize waste generation.
End-of-life management is crucial when it comes to enforcing sustainability as it is essential
to make a correct management of waste to be able to protect the environment around us,
(Wittmer, 2018). The 5 R's (Reduce, Recycle, Repurpose, Repair, and Reuse) are vital terms
in the search for sustainability, in this case companies should adopt and align them to their
goals and objectives as this will help them to minimize waste, recycle materials, be creative in
repurposing, repair instead of replacing, and promote reusability in their products and practices.


Reducing or eliminating pollution as lately, many conferences or trade shows, one of the hot
topics is how to reduce the use of environmentally unfriendly materials in production, as well
as by-products of manufacturing processes. For example, using renewed interest in dry or neardry machining, using as little coolant as possible while performing metal removal or deburring, taking the burrs off of finished material after it’s been cut is another process that uses
quite a few powerful chemicals (Kanemoto, 2021).
Optimizing the current use of fossil fuels is a given as cutting energy cost is a win-win situation
in today’s environment. There seems to be little argument that we are close to peak oil that is
availability, when half of the world’s known oil reserves have been consumed. The only
argument left is when the supply crunch will start, or if it has already begun. Save now by
turning off machinery when it is not being used. Replace a single-speed motor with a variablespeed or servo drive to reduce energy consumption (Heavey, 2017). Also, look into alternative
sustainable sources of energy like wind, solar, or hydroelectric power.
Raising awareness among customers about the environmental consequences of their
consumption choices, such as carbon emissions, water usage, and waste generation is crucial
in the fight for a better tomorrow. They can be educated through various forms, such as
sustainability campaigns, labelling systems (e.g., eco-labels), and information dissemination
through digital platforms, (Griggs, 2017). Some research shows that informed consumers are
more likely to demand sustainable products, which, in turn, encourages businesses to adopt
greener practices.
Green financing and economic incentive for example green bonds, sustainable investment
funds, and incentives like tax breaks, subsidies, and grants for sustainable initiatives from
governments and financial institutions can provide businesses and individuals with the
necessary funds to invest in sustainable consumption and production hence doing away with
the barrier of financial constraints, (Brown, 2013). Lastly, collaborative initiatives between
businesses, governments, and non-governmental organizations can pool resources and
expertise to implement large-scale sustainable projects.




CHAPTER THREE: METHODOLOGY
3.1 Introduction
This chapter presented the research design, study population, sample size and selection
technique, Sampling techniques, data collection methods, data collection instruments, validity
and reliability, data collection procedures, data management and analysis, measurement of
variables and conclusion.
3.2 Research Design
According to Amin (2005) a research design is a conceptual structure where research is
conducted and it constitutes a blue print for collection, measurement and analysis of data. This
study used a cross-section study design using both qualitative and quantitative approaches
(Amin, 2005). The cross-sectional approach was used because the issues of sustainable
production on sustainable consumption was studied at that point in time (Amin, 2005). The
study used both quantitative and qualitative approach because qualitative methods provided indepth explanations to events while quantitative methods provided the data needed to meet
required objectives and to test the hypotheses (Mugenda, 1999).
3.3 The Study Population
Mugenda and Mugenda (2003) define population as an entire group of individual or objects
having common observable characteristic. The study population comprised of management
staff and employees from the procurement, accounting and finance departments in addition to
the relevant departments responsible for sustainable production on sustainable consumption
Coca-Cola Company Namanve branch and 50 respondents helped to get the required
information.
3.4 Sample Size and Selection Technique
According to (Sekaran, 2003) a sample is a subset of a population. It comprised some selected
members who were referred to as elements. Sampling is the process of selecting a sufficient
number of elements from the population so that a study of the sample and an understanding of
its characteristics would make it possible to generate such characteristics to the population
elements. The study selected up to 44 respondents based on Krejcie and Morgan Sampling
Guidelines (see appendix III) as shown in table 1 below.





Table 1: Population Category and Sample Size of the Respondents
Population category
Total population
Sample size
Sampling Techniques
Senior staff members
Purposive
Employees
Simple random sampling
Total

Source: researcher’s primary data 2018
As table 1 indicated, a sample of 44 respondents were selected out of 50, based on Krejcie and
Morgan’s (1980) sampling guidelines (see appendix III). In this study purposive sampling
technique was used for senior staff members whereas Simple random sampling was used for
the employees because of their large number.
3.5 Sampling Techniques
Sampling is a systematic process of selecting the number of individual cases/units to provide
information needed for the study (Kombo and Tromp 2006). Thus, sampling was important in
research due to the limitations in studying the whole population and reduction of both costs
and time required since a small number of units have to be investigated (Eswaran and Singh,
2010).
There are broadly two sampling approaches thus probability and none probability sampling
techniques. The probability sampling approach involved selecting a sample in such a way that
all the elements in the population have some chances of being selected (Amin, 2005). This
study used simple random sampling which was a sample obtained from the populations in such
a way that samples of the same size have equal chances of being selected (Amin, 2005). As
indicated in table 1 above, the study used simple random sampling for employees. In using
simple random sampling, the study used the cluster approach where names in each category
was written on a sheet of paper and one picked at a time until the required number was reached.
To arrive at the sample size the study used proportionate sampling (50/44*the No in the
population category).
In the non-probability approach, the elements in the population do not have a well-defined
chance of being selected (Amin, 2005). This study used purposive sampling which involved
the researcher using own judgment or common sense regarding the participants from whom
the information was to be collected. Thus, the selection of the respondents was based on the


researcher’s experience with the respondents’ tenure of the required information. This study
used purposive sampling for the senior staff members.
3.6 Data Collection Methods
The study used a survey approach where quantitative data was collected. There are several
survey approaches, however for the purpose of this study the questionnaire was used as
discussed below.
3.6.1 The questionnaire method.
The questionnaire was issued to 44 respondents at Coca-Cola Company Namanve branch. The
respondents noted their answers within closely defined alternatives. The aim of using this
method was to get broad-based views from the respondents. The questionnaire used a 5-point
Likert rating scale to secure the degree of the presence of the variables of interest in the study
population. In cases of open-ended questions, the respondents encouraged to express
themselves more freely as well as provide any other information as they saw fit.
3.7 Data Collection Instruments
3.7.1 Self-Administered Questionnaire
A total of 44 questionnaires was distributed to the targeted population. The study used a close
ended questionnaire for getting response from respondents. A standard Questionnaire on a fivepoint Likert scale was used to get quantifiable primary data from individual respondents on a
scale of 5- Strongly Agree; 4- Agree; 3- Not Sure; 2- Disagree; 1- Strongly Disagree.
3.8. Data collection procedure
The researcher obtained an introductory letter from the faculty of Business and administration
of Uganda Christian University Mukono, to conduct research to Coca-Cola Company Namanve
branch. A letter of permission to carry out the research was obtained from Coca-Cola Company
Namanve branch offices in order for the researcher to carry out the study. The researcher then
obtained a document containing the names of senior staff members and employees in the
organization. The researcher distributed questionnaires herself with the help of the office
messenger who knew better all the employees at the organization and 44 respondents received
these questionnaires. A period of one week was given to the respondents to fill them and this
was done to give time to respondents for probing and clarification of questions where they had
not been understood clearly. Afterwards data collected was checked for errors and complied
for analysis.


3.9 Data Processing and analysis
The data collected was edited, coded and later analysed using Statistical Package for the Social
Sciences (SPSS) computer program. Quantitative data was presented in form of descriptive
statistics using percentages and frequencies for each of the variables used. Quantitative data
was then presented inform of Univariant analysis. The data was examined to extract the themes
and sub-themes in relation to the research objectives, and then used to describe and explain the
phenomenon about the impact of sustainable production on sustainable consumption.
3.10 Data Analysis
Descriptive statistics of frequency tables were used to analyse and present the data from
questionnaires. In particular, the researcher used SPSS software package version to generate
frequency tables as means of presenting data. The data was summarized, analysed and
interpreted as on each research objective. In contrast, qualitative data from Interview scripts,
notes and statements was systematically coded and classified into broad descriptive categories
while exploring themes, meanings and/or issues that emerged from the information gained from
the interview. This data was further linked to the research objectives/questions to generate
meaning and explanation on the study topic.
3.11 Limitations of the study
The researcher experienced a problem of limited finances with respect to this study. Costs
regarding this limitation included transport, printing and photocopying of relevant materials.
However, the researcher had to solicit some money from her mother and use it sparingly so as
to overcome the cost constraint.
The researcher experienced a time constraint in data collection, analysing of data and in final
presentation of the report. However, the researcher overcame this problem by ensuring that the
time element is put into consideration and that all appointments agreed upon with respondents
is fully met.
The researcher was not able to probe deeper into the subject matter because some respondents
hide some information because it was regarded as confidential. However, the researcher
assured the respondents that any information given is to be treated with maximum
confidentiality.




CHAPTER FOUR
PRESENTATION, ANALYSIS AND INTERPRETATION OF FINDINGS
4.0 Introduction
The study was undertaken to investigate the impact of sustainable production on sustainable
consumption. Data was collected using questionnaires which were based on set objectives
which included; assessing the factors for achieving sustainable production at Coca-Cola
Company Namanve branch, analysing the challenges encountered in implementing sustainable
consumption at Coca-Cola Company Namanve branch and suggesting possible ways of
Namanve branch
4.1 General characteristics of respondents.
The characteristics of respondents in terms of Gender (sex), Age bracket and level of education
were as shown below.
4.1.1 Gender of respondents
Table 1: showing Gender of respondents

Valid
Cumulative
Valid
male
53.3
53.3
53.3
female 14
46.7
46.7
100.0
Total
100.0
100.0
According to the table above, majority (53.3%) of the respondents were males whereas the
minority; (46.7%) were females. This showed that there was gender imbalance in the study
which was related to the willingness of the respondents to participate in the study. This however
assisted the researcher to obtain distinct data from respondents of different sex which was
unbiased.






4.1.2 Age of respondents
Table 2: showing Age of respondents

Valid
Cumulative
Valid
below
years
6.7
6.7
6.7
20-25 years
60.0
60.0
66.7
26-30 years
20.0
20.0
86.7
31-35 years
6.7
6.7
93.3
36-40 years
6.7
6.7
100.0
Total
100.0
100.0

According to the table above, majority (60.0%) of the respondents were aged between 20-25
years, (20.0%) had 26-30 years whereas the minority (6.7%), (6.7%) and (6.7%) all had years
ranging from below 20 years, 31-35 years and 36-40 years respectively. This also helped the
researcher to obtain varying views about the study under investigation since the study involved
respondents with different age groups.
4.1.3 Education level of the respondents
Table 3: showing Education level of respondents

Valid Percent
Valid
Certificate 1
3.3
3.3
diploma
26.7
26.7
Bachelors
30.0
30.0
others
40.0
40.0




Total
100.0
100.0

According to the table above, majority (40.0%) of the respondents had attained other levels of
education, (30.0%) had attained a bachelors, (26.7%) had diploma whereas the minority;
(1.1%) had attained a certificate level of education. This implied that majority of the
respondents had obtained some kind of education which assured the researcher that the
respondents could easily interpret the questionnaires and raise views relevant to the study under
investigation.





4.2. The factors for achieving sustainable production
Table 4: showing the factors for achieving sustainable production
The factors for achieving
sustainable production
SA
A
N
D
SD
Resource efficiency not only
looks to minimize waste but
also reduce exhaustion of nonrenewable resources
30.0% 14
46.7% 4
3.3%
6.7%
Eco‐efficiency not only aims to
prevent waste and increase
resource productivity but also
to ensures minimal impact
towards ecology.
56.7% 9
30.0% 2
6.7%
3.3%
3.3%
Incorporation
of
green
practices into supply chain
management
activities
can
enable
organizations
meet
goals
associated
with
environmental
and
social
sustainability.
36.7% 8
16.7% 5
3.3%
Adopting
low-carbon
technologies can help reduce
energy
and
promote
development.
53.3% 9
30.0% 1
3.3%
10.0% 1
3.3%
The practice of sustainability
reporting
ensures
accountability,
transparency
and compliance.
33.3% 13
43.3% 5
3.3%
3.3%
Adopting
process
design
strategies and standardization
plays a crucial role in the
promotion
of
production.
40.0% 9
30.0% 6
6.7%
3.3%
Does external pressure from
stakeholders, international and
domestic
regulations
to
influence
the
adoption
manufacturing
processes?
6.7%








According to the table above, majority (46.7%) of the respondents agreed that resource
efficiency not only looks to minimize waste but also reduce exhaustion of non-renewable
resources, (30.0%) strongly agreed, (13.3%) were not sure, (6.7%) strongly disagreed whereas
the minority; (3.3%) disagreed.
More to this, the study findings stressed that the majority; (56.7%) of the respondents strongly
agreed that Eco‐efficiency not only aims to prevent waste and increase resource productivity
but also to ensures minimal impact towards ecology, (30.0%) agreed, (6.7%) were not sure,
whereas the minority; (3.3%) disagreed and strongly disagreed respectively.
In line to the study findings, majority (36.7%) of the respondents strongly agreed that
Incorporation of green practices into supply chain management activities can enable
organizations meet goals associated with environmental and social sustainability. (26.7%)
agreed, (16.7%) both were not sure and disagreed respectively whereas the minority; (3.3%)
strongly disagreed.
The study findings also stressed that the majority, (53.3%) of the respondents strongly agreed
that adopting low-carbon technologies can help reduce energy consumption and promote
sustainable development, (30.0%) agreed, (10.0%) disagreed whereas the minority; (3.3%)
were not sure and strongly disagreed respectively.
In relation to the study findings, majority (43.3%) of the respondents agreed that the practice
of sustainability reporting ensures accountability, transparency and compliance (33.3%)
strongly agreed, (16.7%) were not sure, whereas the minority; (3.3%) disagreed and strongly
disagreed respectively.
Furthermore, the study findings stressed that majority (40.0%) of the respondents strongly
agreed that adopting process design strategies and standardization plays a crucial role in the
promotion of sustainable production. (30.0%) agreed, (20.0%) were not sure, (6.7%) disagreed
whereas the minority; (3.3%) strongly disagreed.
Lastly the study finding acknowledged that majority (33.3%) of the respondents agreed that
external pressure from stakeholders, international and domestic regulations influence the
adoption sustainable manufacturing processes, (26.7%) strongly agreed, (20.0%) disagreed,
(13.3%) were not sure whereas the minority; (6.7%) strongly disagreed.




In an interview with the top management on factors for achieving sustainable production, the
respondents suggested that;
There is need for sustainability and long-term thinking: Attaining the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) will require a combination of policies, international
cooperation, and capacity-building and technical assistance directed towards long-term
sustainability, as well as a strengthening of the implementation of Macro Economic
Application System (MEAs). A truly integrated set of policies and actions will be
required from all stakeholders influencing consumption and production patterns. This
will entail consideration of the interlinkages between different goals and economic
sectors as well as an integrated approach to social, economic and environmental
objectives. Central objectives will be improving and sustaining the quality of life and
health for all, while decoupling socio-economic development from escalating resource
use and environmental degradation. SDGs could importantly address critical issues
such as irreversible damage to the global environment, and key tipping points that
trigger feedbacks leading to runaway negative impacts. Targets and indicators for the
goals could be designed to promote such decoupling and improve resource efficiency
throughout product life cycles, increasing recycling and reducing waste, thus reaping
important economic gains and higher contributions to human welfare.














4.3. The challenges encountered in implementing sustainable consumption
Table 6: showing the challenges encountered in implementing sustainable consumption

The challenges encountered in
implementing
SA
A
N
D
SD
There is application of excessive
fertilizers
and
pesticides
to
improve crop production that has
negative
environmental
implications
(F)
(%)
60.0% 10
33.3% 2
6.7%
0.0%
0.0%
Lack of e-waste management has
led to an increase in resource
depletion,
green-house
gas
emissions, soil contamination,
water and air pollution.
33.3% 13
43.3% 5
3.3%
3.3%
Food wastage and losses at
consumer and production levels
exerts undue pressure on the
lands for higher production of
food to feed the ever-growing
population.
40.0% 9
30.0% 6
6.7%
3.3%
The negative perception of
sustainability labels can create
distrust and result in consumers
opting for less eco-friendly
options.

20.0% 15
50.0% 5
10.0% 1
3.3%
There is limited retail of green
products
which
makes
it
incredibly
difficult
and
inconvenient
to
shop
consciously.
6.7%
Social norms and community
standards
are
the
primary
determinants of our consumption
behaviour, especially when it
concerns the environment
43.3% 12
40.0% 2
6.7%
10.0% 0
0.0%
Green products are usually more
expensive
compared
to
traditional products and this 8
26.7% 8
10.0% 6
20.0%


limits
consumers
from
purchasing sustainable products.
There is lack of awareness of
consumers as to the importance
of sustainable consumption in
communities
40.0% 10
33.3% 3
10.0% 2
6.7%
3.3%
The table above showed that majority, (60.0%) of the respondents strongly agreed that there is
application of excessive fertilizers and pesticides to improve crop production that has negative
environmental implications, (33.3%) agreed, whereas the minority, (6.7%) were not sure.
More to this the table stipulated that majority, (43.4%) of the respondents agreed that lack of
e-waste management has led to an increase in resource depletion, green-house gas emissions,
soil contamination, water and air pollution, (33.3%) strongly disagreed, (16.7%) were not sure
whereas the least (3.3%) both disagreed and strongly disagreed respectively.
In relation to the study findings, majority (40.0%) of the respondents agreed that food wastage
and losses at consumer and production levels exerts undue pressure on the lands for higher
production of food to feed the ever-growing population, (30.0%) agreed, (20.0%) were not
sure, (6.7%) disagreed whereas the minority; (3.3%) strongly disagreed.
The study findings stressed that majority, (50.0%) of the respondents agreed that the negative
perception of sustainability labels can create distrust and result in consumers opting for less
eco-friendly options, (20.0%) strongly agreed, (16.7%) were not sure, (10.0%) disagreed
whereas the minority; (3.3%) strongly disagreed.
In line to the study findings, it was highlighted that majority (33.3%) of the respondents agreed
that there is limited retail of green products which makes it incredibly difficult and
inconvenient to shop consciously, (26.7%) strongly agreed, (20.0%) were not sure and the
minority; (6.7%) strongly disagreed.
Also, the study findings acknowledged that majority (43.3%) of the respondents strongly
agreed that social norms and community standards are the primary determinants of our
consumption behaviour, especially when it concerns the environment, (40.0%) agreed, (10.0%)
disagreed whereas the minority; (6.7%) were not sure.
Likewise, the study showed that majority (26.7%) and (26.7%) of the respondents both strongly
agreed and agreed respectively that green products are usually more expensive compared to


traditional products and this limits consumers from purchasing sustainable products., (20.0%)
strongly disagreed, (16.7) were not sure and the least (10.0%) disagreed.
Lastly the study findings indicated that majority (40.0%) of the respondents strongly agreed
that there is lack of awareness of consumers as to the importance of sustainable consumption
in communities, (33.3%), (10.0%) were not sure, (6.7%) disagreed whereas the minority,
(3.3%) strongly disagreed.
In an interview with the top management on challenges encountered in implementing
sustainable consumption, the respondents suggested that;
Many environmental challenges result from unsustainable production and consumption
patterns. These include the continuous and increasing conversion of natural ecosystems
for agriculture, the fragmentation of habitats, loss of biodiversity and degradation of
various ecosystem services, overfishing, unsustainable agricultural practices and
overexploitation of other renewable resources on which people and economies depend.
Diverse negative environmental impacts are caused by various extractive and
processing industries, as well as by waste disposal, especially dumping and burning
around urban areas. Pollution damage is degrading ecosystems that provide key
services underpinning human welfare, and often impacts directly on human health and
economic productivity.
Furthermore, he explained about escalating resource use. Globally, increasing resource
use, waste and pollution are undermining prospects for future development. There is
also an inequitable use of resources and distribution of the impacts of pollution and
environmental degradation – between the wealthy and the poor, urban and rural
populations, and men and women. Consumption and production patterns in most
economic sectors have to change significantly to address these challenges.













4.4. The possible ways of ensuring sustainable production and sustainable consumption
Table 5: showing the possible ways of ensuring sustainable production and sustainable
The possible ways of ensuring
sustainable production and
sustainable consumption
SA
A
N
D
SD
Balancing the use of natural
resources can foster growth and
the
efficient
use
natural
resources.
6.7%
Proper
planning,
inventory
management, sharing of surplus
food, freezing of foodstuffs,
feeding of scraps to animals,
being creative with leftovers are
some of the ways to minimize
food loss and waste.
43.3% 12
40.0% 2
6.7%
10.0% 0
0.0%
Well-designed and enforced
policies and regulations can
compel both the consumers
and producers to adopt
sustainable practices.

26.7% 8
10.0% 6
20.0%
Incorporating
reduction,
recycling, repurpose, repair and
reuse in our processes and
products can help to minimize
waste by fostering end-of-life
management.
40.0% 10
33.3% 3
10.0% 2
6.7%
3.3%
Raising
awareness
among
customers
about
the
environmental consequences of
their consumption choices can 12
40.0% 7
23.3% 4
3.3%
6.7%


foster
the
adoption
of
Optimizing the current use of
fossil
fuels
can
help
to
minimize the consumption of
energy.
30.0% 14
46.7% 4
3.3%
6.7%
Encouraging the purchase of
energy star rated electronics
from companies that encourage
buy-backs
can
minimize
increase of e-waste.
56.7% 9
30.0% 2
6.7%
3.3%
3.3%

According to the table above, majority (33.3%) of the respondents agreed that balancing the
use of natural resources can foster growth and the efficient use natural resources, (26.7%)
strongly agreed, (20.0%) disagreed, (13.3%) were not sure whereas the minority; (6.7%)
strongly disagreed.
More to this, the study findings stressed that majority (43.3%) of the respondents strongly
agreed that proper planning, inventory management, sharing of surplus food, freezing of
foodstuffs, feeding of scraps to animals, being creative with leftovers are some of the ways to
minimize food loss and waste, (40.0%) agreed, (%10.0) disagreed whereas the minority; (6.7%)
were not sure.
In line to the study findings, majority (26.7%) both strongly agreed and agreed that welldesigned and enforced policies and regulations can compel both the consumers and producers
to adopt sustainable practices, (20.0%) strongly disagreed, (16.7%) were not sure whereas the
minority; (10.0%) disagreed.
In relation to the study findings, majority (40.0%) 0f the respondents strongly agreed that
incorporating reduction, recycling, repurpose, repair and reuse in our processes and products
can help to minimize waste by fostering end-of-life management (33.3%) agreed, (10.0%) were
not sure, (6.7%) disagreed whereas the minority (3.3%) strongly disagreed.
The study findings also stressed that majority, (40.0%) of the respondents strongly agreed that
raising awareness among customers about the environmental consequences of their
consumption choices can foster the adoption of sustainable (23.3%) agreed, (13.3%) were not
sure, (6.7%) strongly disagreed whereas the minority; (3.3%) disagreed.
Likewise, the study findings revealed that majority (46.7%) of the respondents agreed that
optimizing the current use of fossil fuels can help to minimize the consumption of energy,


(30.0%) strongly agreed, (13.3%) were not sure, (6.7%) strongly disagreed and the minority;
(3.3%) disagreed.

Lastly the study findings acknowledged that majority, (56.7%) of the respondents strongly
agreed that encouraging the purchase of energy star rated electronics from companies that
encourage buy-backs can minimize increase of e-waste, (6.7%) were not sure whereas the
minority; (3.3%) strongly disagreed and strongly disagreed respectively.
In an interview with the top management on possible ways of ensuring sustainable production
and sustainable consumption at Coca-Cola Namanve branch, the respondents suggested that;
Shifting to SCP will require fundamental changes in the way society operates and how
we live our lives. Such a full-scale transition will take considerable time; thus, given
the urgency and magnitude of unsustainability and the central role of consumption and
production, there is a need for immediate forceful action to bring the transition in
motion. The SDGs, which have been in place for a good number of years, should serve
as a catalyst to kick-start this societal transformation. This requires addressing the major
drivers of consumerism and overconsumption, as well as unequal consumption
opportunities, in modern society. Dealing only with the symptoms and addressing only
the politically less challenging issues will not result in the kind of changes needed for
putting our civilization on the track to sustainability. The goals and indicators of the
SDGs, and the associated action plans for implementation, must be formulated from
this perspective.
Furthermore, SCP must be coordinated with the 10YFP to ensure complementarity and
synergies. An immediate opportunity for such coordination is through the 10YFP UN
Inter-Agency Coordination Group. The setting of indicators and targets for both the
SDGs and the 10YFP is a foundation for complementary operation. Together, both
programs would need a comprehensive set of indicators that would consolidate
environmental, social and economic elements into a common framework for
monitoring progress. A periodic report as such would show: (a) how production and
consumption patterns contribute or fail to contribute to the wellbeing of people; and (b)
how the prospects of achieving wellbeing by future generations are threatened or
safeguarded by current production and consumption activities.









CHAPTER FIVE
SUMMARY, CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
5.0 Introduction
This chapter presents a summary of findings observed and inferred from the data presented in
chapter four. The summary of findings is based on the literature available in chapter two. This
chapter also provides, the conclusions, recommendations and suggested areas for further study.
5.1 Summary of the Findings
5.1.1 The factors for achieving sustainable production
From the study finding, it was highlighted that majority of the respondents strongly agreed
and agreed that resource efficiency not only looks to minimize waste but also reduce
exhaustion of non-renewable resources and this was supported by (Brizga, 2014), who stated
that unlike past approaches, resource efficiency considers the entire lifecycle of resources,
focusing on waste reduction, resource conservation, and environmentally-friendly production
processes. Also, the study highlighted that most of the respondents acknowledged that, eco‐
efficiency not only aims to prevent waste and increase resource productivity but also to
ensures minimal impact towards ecology and this was similar to Chang, 2013) who said that
eco‐efficiency is a management philosophy, which encourages business to search for
environmental improvement while at the same time giving social and economic benefits by
fostering innovation, growth and competitiveness. Eco‐efficiency can be viewed from many
levels and is basically a call to achieve more value added from resources input with reduced
emissions and waste. Likewise, the study indicated that incorporation of green practices into
supply chain management activities can enable organizations meet goals associated with
environmental and social sustainability and this was in agreement with (Shaw, (2011), who
revealed that the increasing energy demand in developing countries has led to higher energy
costs and shortages, making it a pressing issue to address. However, these challenges also
provide motivation for the manufacturing industry to implement practices that reduce
greenhouse gas emissions and energy consumption. Lastly, the study stipulated that external
pressure from stakeholders, international and domestic regulations influence the adoption
sustainable manufacturing processes and this was related to (Burja, 2009) who said that
Stakeholders play a crucial role in encouraging companies to adopt sustainable
manufacturing practices and engage in process and product innovation. Pressure from
stakeholders in the supply chain can lead companies to become more sustainability-


conscious, prompting the establishment of sustainability goals and practices in response to
stakeholder demands.
5.1.2 The challenges encountered in implementing sustainable consumption
From the study findings, the study indicated that majority of the respondents agreed and
strongly agreed that there is application of excessive fertilizers and pesticides to improve crop
production that has negative environmental implications and this was similar to (Rau, (2014)
who stipulated that currently, due to agricultural industrialization, more and more farmers in
Uganda and indeed globally, are using agro-chemicals that is fertilizers and pesticides in their
farms to deal with pests and all other destructive insects as well as increasing productivity.
More so, the study findings stressed that majority of the respondents agreed and strongly
agreed that lack of e-waste management has led to an increase in resource depletion, greenhouse gas emissions, soil contamination, water and air pollution and this was related to
(McDonagh, 2017), who said that the increase in e-waste is mostly brought about by
exporting of e-waste to developing countries which lack technology to properly dispose of it,
planned obsolescence, the cost associated with repairs and ignorance. Likewise, the study
findings showed that food wastage and losses at consumer and production levels exerts undue
pressure on the lands for higher production of food to feed the ever-growing population and
this was in agreement with (Freund, 2018) who revealed that wastage and loss not only leave
the people hungry with inadequate food to consume but also exerts undue pressure on the
lands for higher production of food to feed the ever-growing population. Likewise, the study
findings acknowledged that social norms and community standards are the primary
determinants of our consumption behaviour, especially when it concerns the environment and
this was related to (Gilmer, (2019) who revealed that having a community that keeps one
accountable is incredibly influential which is why it’s important to seek out like-minded
people wherever one can and with online communities brightly growing every day, it will not
be hard to find a squad to cheer one on.
Lastly, the study findings agreed that there is lack of awareness of consumers as to the
importance of sustainable consumption in communities and this was related to Sedlacko,
(2014), who revealed that the lack of awareness of policymakers about the urgency of
sustainability issues can delay or hinder the implementation of effective regulations and
policies.
5.1.3 The possible ways of ensuring sustainable production and sustainable
From the study findings, most of the respondents agreed and strongly agreed that balancing
the use of natural resources can foster growth and the efficient use natural resources and this
was related to (Noble, (2017) who acknowledged that consistently negative saving rates
indicate diminishing wealth and unsustainable development. Positive savings form the basis
for future growth. More so, the study indicated that proper planning, inventory management,
sharing of surplus food, freezing of foodstuffs, feeding of scraps to animals, being creative
with leftovers are some of the ways to minimize food loss and waste and this was similar to
(Gaffney, 2017) who stressed that minimizing food loss and waste is crucial and involves
addressing decreases in food quantity and quality at all stages of the supply chain. This
problem is evident not only in our homes but especially in catering companies that waste
unconsumed food daily due to excessive production. Likewise, the study findings showed


that optimizing the current use of fossil fuels can help to minimize the consumption of energy
and this was agreement with (Heavey, 2017) who revealed that there seems to be little
argument that we are close to peak oil that is availability, when half of the world’s known oil
reserves have been consumed. The only argument left is when the supply crunch will start, or
if it has already begun.
Lastly, the study findings, stressed that encouraging the purchase of energy star rated
electronics from companies that encourage buy-backs can minimize increase of e-waste and
this was similar to Bengtsson. (2014) who said that to minimize e-waste, we need to raise
awareness of its improper management in developing countries, promote the purchase of
energy star rated electronics from companies that encourage buy-backs, and emphasize
recycling, repair, and repurposing of equipment.
5.2 Conclusion
From the study findings, the factors for achieving sustainable production included; Resource
efficiency not only looks to minimize waste but also reduce exhaustion of non-renewable
resources, Eco‐efficiency not only aims to prevent waste and increase resource productivity
but also to ensures minimal impact towards ecology, Incorporation of green practices into
supply chain management activities can enable organizations meet goals associated with
environmental and social sustainability, Adopting low-carbon technologies can help reduce
energy consumption and promote sustainable development, The practice of sustainability
reporting ensures accountability, transparency and compliance, Adopting process design
strategies and standardization plays a crucial role in the promotion of sustainable production
and external pressure from stakeholders, international and domestic regulations to influence
the adoption sustainable manufacturing processes.
Also the study findings highlighted that the challenges encountered in implementing
sustainable consumption included; There is application of excessive fertilizers and pesticides
to improve crop production that has negative environmental implications, Lack of e-waste
management has led to an increase in resource depletion, green-house gas emissions, soil
contamination, water and air pollution, Food wastage and losses at consumer and production
levels exerts undue pressure on the lands for higher production of food to feed the ever-growing
population, The negative perception of sustainability labels can create distrust and result in
consumers opting for less eco-friendly options, There is limited retail of green products which
makes it incredibly difficult and inconvenient to shop consciously, Social norms and
community standards are the primary determinants of our consumption behaviour, especially
when it concerns the environment, Green products are usually more expensive compared to
traditional products and this limits consumers from purchasing sustainable products and there


is lack of awareness of consumers as to the importance of sustainable consumption in
communities.
Lastly, the study findings indicated that the possible ways of ensuring sustainable production
and sustainable consumption included; Balancing the use of natural resources can foster growth
and the efficient use natural resources, Proper planning, inventory management, sharing of
surplus food, freezing of foodstuffs, feeding of scraps to animals, being creative with leftovers
are some of the ways to minimize food loss and waste, Well-designed and enforced policies
and regulations can compel both the consumers and producers to adopt sustainable practices,
Incorporating reduction, recycling, repurpose, repair and reuse in our processes and products
can help to minimize waste by fostering end-of-life management, Raising awareness among
customers about the environmental consequences of their consumption choices can foster the
adoption of sustainable, Optimizing the current use of fossil fuels can help to minimize the
consumption of energy and Encouraging the purchase of energy star rated electronics from
companies that encourage buy-backs can minimize increase of e-waste.
5.3 Recommendations
There is need to Improve financing mechanisms to promote technology transfer and
innovation. The current financing modes in Uganda are not favourable. The interest rates
charged by commercial banks in Uganda are exorbitant and as a result, this has made it very
difficult for manufacturing firms like Coca-Cola Company to invest in new and up-to-date
manufacturing technologies.
Management of Coca-Cola company should Carry out Cleaner Production Assessments and
prepare industry specific Environmental Management Plans; develop a code of conduct that
could be abided by the industry and promote labelling and recognition mechanisms that
recognises continuous improvements by the manufacturing industry; promote lifecycle
assessments in the sector. This in turn may enhance efficiency of resource consumption in the
manufacturing subsector while minimizing adverse environmental impacts and thus increase
productivity.
There is need for strengthening awareness creation and trainings in the areas of waste
management like the application of circular models where waste is used as an input as opposed
to the current traditional linear model of take make and waste which being applied in most
manufacturing firms of Uganda. Knowledge generation through research should go hand in
hand with strategies to create the capacity to apply and roll out new knowledge to promote the
implementation of sustainability practices.


5.4 Areas for further study
Transforming systems of consumption and production for achieving the sustainable
development goals.
Making Sustainable Consumption and Production the Core of Sustainable Development Goals.