i






AN EXAMINATION OF FINANCIAL DISBURSEMENT AND
MANAGEMENT IN SACCO MEMBERS EXPECTATIONS: A case study of
Ylp in Mukono Municipality




EDITH ACHARIA JOSEPH ELIA



S19B05/039

A RESEARCH DISSERTATION SUBMITTED TO THE SCHOOL OF
BUSINESS IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS FOR
THE AWARD OF A BACHELOR’S DEGREE IN BUSINESS
ADMINISTRATION OF UGANDA CHRISTIAN UNIVERSITY


August, 2023







ii


Declaration

I EDITH ACHIARA JOSEPH ELIA hereby declare that this is my original work, is not
plagiarized and has not been submitted any other institution for any award. Student’s
name, Signature and Date

Student’s Name: Signature Date



iii

................................................ .............................................. .................................













Approval

I,..............................................................clearly ascertain and affirm that, the work
presented by Edith Acharia Joseph Elia, is the true finding that she carried out under
my lose guidance and supervision for the entire that she was handed over to me.
Supervisor’s Name Signature Date





iv

List of Acronyms
NGOs: Nongovernment Organizations
UBOS: Uganda Bureau of Statistics
MGLSD: Ministry of Gender Labour and Social Development
YLP: Youth Livelihood Programme
EFL: Education for All
NUSAF: Northern Uganda Social Action Fund
WEP: Women Empowerment Programme













v

Table of Contents

Declaration ......................................................................................... ii
Approval ........................................................................................... iii
List of Acronyms .................................................................................. iv
Table of Contents .................................................................................. v
Abstract .......................................................................................... viii
THE GENERAL INTRODUCTION ................................................................... 0
1.0 The Background of Study .................................................................... 0
1.2 The Problem Statement ..................................................................... 2
1.3 Purpose of the Study ......................................................................... 4
1.4 Specific Objectives ........................................................................... 4
1.5 Research questions ........................................................................... 4
1.6 Scope of the Study ............................................................................
1.6.1 Geographical Scope ...................................................................... 5
1.6.2 Content Scope ............................................................................ 5
1.6.3 Time Scope ................................................................................ 6
1.7 Justification ................................................................................... 6
1.8 Significance .................................................................................... 7



vi

1.9 Theoretical Framework ...................................................................... 7
THE LITERATURE REVIEW ......................................................................... 9
2.0 Introduction .............................................. Error! Bookmark not defined.
2.1 Evidence for the use of Sacco members expectation Approach ....................... 9
2.2 Critiques on the Sacco members expectation Approach .............................
2.3 Scale of Achievements of the Sacco Youth Likelihood Programme Approach ...... 12
2.4 Evaluation of the Literature .............................................................. 12
2.5 Research gaps ............................................................................... 14
2.6 Conclusion ................................................ Error! Bookmark not defined.
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY ..................................................................... 16
3.0 Introduction .............................................. Error! Bookmark not defined.
3.1 The Research Design ........................................................................ 16
3.2 Target population ........................................................................... 16
3.4 Population and Sampling Technique ...................................................... 17
3.5 Sample size .................................................................................. 17
3.6 Variables and Indicators .................................................................... 18
3.7 Information/Data Sources ................................................................. 18
3.7.1 Primary data ............................................................................. 18
3.7.2 Secondary data .......................................................................... 18
3.8 Procedure for Data Collection ........................................................... 18
3.8.1 Data Collection Tool ...................................................................... 19



vii

3.8.2 Quality/Error Control ................................................................... 19
3.9 Interview schedules ..................................................................... 19
3.10 Strategy for Data Processing and Analysis ............................................. 19
3.11 Ethical Considerations Anticipated Methodological Constraints .................... 20
3.12 Anticipated Methodological Constraints ................................................ 21
3.13 Work Plan/Time Line ...................................................................... 21
4.0 Data Presentation, Analysis, and Interpretation ....................................... 23
4.1 Presentation and Analysis of Qualitative Data .......................................... 23
4.2 Presentation of Qualitative Data ......................................................... 24
4.3 Analysis of Qualitative Data ............................................................... 24
4.4 Presentation of Quantitative Data ....................................................... 25
4.5 Analysis of Quantitative Data ............................................................. 25
4.6 Interpretation of Research Findings ...................................................... 25
4.7 Presentation and Analysis of Quantitative Data ........................................ 29
4.7 Interpretation of Qualitative and Quantitative Findings .............................. 30
5.0 Discussion, Conclusions, and Recommendations ....................................... 32
5.1 Discussion of Findings ...................................................................... 32
5.2 Conclusions ................................................................................... 33
5.3 Recommendations ........................................................................... 35



viii

Abstract
This research is dedicated to investigating the interplay between financial
disbursement, management practices within Savings and Credit Cooperative
Organizations (Saccos), and the expectations held by their members. It delves into the
factors shaping these expectations, including economic conditions, demographic
characteristics, communication methods, and past interactions. By scrutinizing the
harmony between Sacco financial procedures and member anticipations, the study
aims to shed light on the effectiveness of these practices. Moreover, it explores the
ripple effects of such alignment or misalignment on member satisfaction, Sacco
reputation, and long-term sustainability. The insights gained from this research offer
practical guidance for Saccos to refine their financial approaches, ensuring they cater
to member expectations and contribute to an optimal member experience.











THE GENERAL INTRODUCTION
1.0 The Background of Study

According to the UBOS Report, (2014) the youths constitute 70 percent of Uganda’s
aggregate population. Most of the youth have limited access to livelihood means,
especially capital (credit) and employment. The Youth Livelihood Assessment Report,
(2016) indicated that, in 2013, 13.3 percent of employable youths had not been
employed and which, was projected to increase to about 18.6 percent by 2015. The
largest share of the unemployed youths are women at 22.4 percent and males take a
portion of 14 percent. With an annual average population growth rate of 3.2% (13
million people), the youth population was anticipated to rise to about 7.7 million
youths by 2015. This increase in youth unemployment and low participation comes at
a time when Uganda and the world at large have put in place strategies and polices
for youth livelihoods.
In order to mitigate poverty among the youths, the government in partnership with
other private actors (NGOs), have occasionally rolled out funds to various youth
groups. For instance, quality Education for All (EFA), Northern Uganda Social Action
Fund (NUSAF2), Skilling Uganda, Youth Enterprise Scheme and Youth Venture Capital
Fund and above all, the Youth Livelihood Programme in particular. The highlighted
government and private partnership interventions in here, are put in place with a
prime intent of providing easy access to credit (funds) for self-development. However,



the accessibility has always been restricted to the Sacco , which is to mean, the
disbursement and management of funds has been a group oriented one in nature.
According to the available research, the government has been consistently organizing
communities into groups as way of enhancing livelihoods. For example the Youth
Livelihood Program (YLP), Women Empowerment Program (WEP) among others has
been rolled out by government by exclusively the Sacco member’s expectation. Most
of the funds have failed to achieve the intended of goal of alleviating individuals’
livelihoods (New Vision, November 05, 2017). Despite organizing people into groups,
the arrangement has failed to stir up the required momentum of improving livelihoods
in Uganda. There have been several interventions to enhance livelihood levels but the
household survey report still indicated that the failure rate problem is escalating to
an unimaginable degree.
The disintegration rate of the groups is very high and rampant simply because, the
Sacco has seemingly transitioned into another form of “subsistence living”. This
especially in such a way that, people access financial credit in order to consume, that
is to say, the saved money is preserved to cater for the postponed expenditure such as
on fees, buying food, festive costs among others and the cycle continues year after
year. The groups have failed to refund the money due to mismanagement, corruption
and abuse of the disbursement process. This makes the fund recovery and collection
problematic and thus, engineering the subsequent failure of the YLP.
Despite the above identified gap, most developing partners like NGOs and government
programs are still persisting on employing the same methodology. For example the



Youth Livelihood Program (YLP), Parish Development Model among others (Wofana,
2018).
Very
little
attention
has
been
paid
towards
reorganizing
or
reexamining/assessing the loopholes especially regarding fund disbursement and
management within the Sacco system. The financial disbursement and management
discrepancies within the Sacco members expectation have compromised the system
and this requires urgent attention (Mumbua, 2015).
Considerable evidence clearly shows that whenever the funds fail to achieve the
intended objectives in regard to livelihood performance levels, it is simply
transformed into another with a different name and new objectives (Bimenyi, 2017).
Regardless of the failures, the group approach seems to be the best methodology of
enhancing livelihood performance levels but our research seeks address the financial
disbursement and management gaps within this kind of structure so that, it can
deliver results in alignment with the intended expectations and goals.

1.2 The Problem Statement

The Ugandan government's Youth Livelihood Programme (YLP) represents a wellintentioned but so far ineffective attempt to address the pressing challenge of youth
unemployment and financial insecurity. The program's ambitious goals have been
undercut by rampant financial mismanagement and abuse within participating youth
groups, calling the entire Sacco model into question. Despite ongoing efforts,
management of member expectations has been very low, evidenced by high default



rates, corruption, and the inability of youth groups to implement viable income
generating activities (Atega, 2022; Auditor General, 2018). Therefore, this study aims
to investigate financial disbursement and management of member expectations in YLP
youth groups.
Youth unemployment is a pivotal development challenge in Uganda, with the youth
bulge representing both promise and peril for the country's future (Shepler, 2017). The
YLP was the government's attempt to provide skills, startup capital, and loans to
youth groups aged 18-30 to engage in joint enterprise. Launched in 2013, over 230,000
youth in 10,000 groups had participated by 2017 (YLP Brief, 2017).

Yet the YLP has failed to meet either member expectations or program goals. Rigorous
evaluations show negligible impacts on earnings or employment for youth versus
nonparticipants (Blattman et al., 2016). Default rates approach 50%, and
investigations reveal groups unable to implement income generating activities or
account for funds (Auditor General, 2018). Financial mismanagement like ghost
groups, embezzlement, and corruption are widespread, undermining the Sacco model
(Bukenya et al., 2016; Wofana 2018). Reforming financial training, monitoring, and
accountability mechanisms is urgently needed if the YLP is to benefit youth rather
than fall victim to mismanagement. This study aims to uncover factors driving
financial abuse and propose interventions to strengthen financial management in
youth groups.



1.3 Purpose of the Study

The research’s main purpose is to investigate how financial disbursement abuses and
management loopholes can challenge the success of the Sacco member’s expectation.
In so doing, the project is deemed to postulate appropriate financial disbursement
and management measures that will help government and the private partners (NGOS)
to streamline the success rate of the Sacco member’s expectation. Therefore, the
prime purpose in simple comprehension is to front the centrality of the financial
disbursement and management as pivotal pillars upon which the extent of
achievement of the group based intervention resonates.
1.4 Specific Objectives
1. To establish how financial disbursement and management related challenges
contribute to the failure of Sacco member’s expectation achieving the intended
results.
2. To examine the role of financial disbursement and management in determining
the success of Sacco members expectation.
3. To find out the possible remedial measures to strengthen financial disbursement
and management in Sacco members expectation.





1.5 Research questions

1. What is the possible financial disbursement and management related
challenges that are contributing to the failures of the Sacco members
expectation?
2. Which role does financial disbursement and management play in influencing the
Sacco member’s expectation?
3. What are the possible measures to strengthen financial disbursement and
management in Sacco member’s expectation?
1.6 Scope of the Study
The scope of this study comprises the geographical parameters, confinement of the
content and the time frame of coverage, all of which clearly define the outlook of the
entire research project as it attempts to address the problem statement (research
gap).
1.6.1 Geographical Scope
The study will be conducted within Mukono Municipality, under Mukono District. The
research will capitalise on the largest parishes within Mukono Municipality as a case
group. Therefore, the geographical scope of the research will be a case study focused
one, with a particular geographical focus on Mukono Municipality.
1.6.2 Content Scope
The study will be generally confined to the field of Finance, with a particular focus on
financial disbursement and management components. Similarly, the content will also



constitute the Youth Livelihood Program (YLP) which edifies the Sacco member’s
expectation as employed by the government and private partners (NGOs). Thus, the
success rate of the group-based interventions will be the project’s dependent variable
and the financial disbursement and management factors will be the
independent/explanatory variables.
1.6.3 Time Scope

The study shall assess the financial disbursement and management related constraints
limiting the scale of achievement of the Sacco member’s expectation, especially the
Youth Livelihood Program in Mukono Municipality in the previous financial year
2023/24. The Financial year 2023/24was selected as the base time period for
reference, because it was the year when the Youth Livelihood Program was expected
to have registered the largest shares of the projected goals and results. Being an
academic study, the research will be carried out for a period of about 3 months.

1.7 Justification
This research will be conducted to explicitly provide answers to the persistent
challenge of the high failure rate of government’s Sacco member’s expectation in
Uganda, which have been attributed to the flaws in the financial disbursement and
management aspects. The inevitable necessity of financial disbursement and
management in determining the success rate of the Sacco member’s expectation and
the YLP in particular, strongly justifies the paramount need for research about the
problem.



The research will be undertaken to also provide a deeper understanding of the central
role of the financial disbursement and management pillars, including their influence
on the success level of the Sacco member’s expectation and how best the two aspects
can be deployed in guiding livelihood expectations especially the YLP, as well as other
group based interventions in the country.
1.8 Significance
This research will help government to understand the challenges on the aspects of
field
financial disbursement and management upon which the group based approach or
interventions access the funds in order to achieve the anticipated results.
The research will also help the government and NGOs to adopt better financial
policies that will enable the Sacco member’s expectation to solve the financial
issuance and management and deliver according to the predefined objectives.
It will also help the government to redefine the modality and trajectory by which
funds are channeled from the central authorities to the intended groups with great
ability to recover them and unify different individuals’ objectives into a common focal
point of livelihood alleviation.
1.9 Theoretical Framework
The Sacco theory is a popular approach commonly employed in improving the lives of
the people living in poverty. The approach constitutes individuals who have come
together for economic or non-economic purposes and in which; communities are
mobilized for development activities. Governments and development agencies are



increasingly adopting and promoting such approaches (Chambers and Conway 2013).
Global investments in Sacco development solutions have been increasing. Several
developing nations have initiated and scaled up Sacco livelihoods programs as the best
approach in practice, which is geared towards guiding the government interventions.
Therefore, the increasing popularization of, the theory Sacco theory irrespective of its
limited achievements especially in Uganda, is still the only way to go in livelihood
alleviation interventions by the government. Policy makers and practitioners have
insisted on using the same approach time and again despite its failure to deliver as
originally intended results. It is therefore, on the basis of this practical gap in the
Sacco theory that our research revolves to launch its investigation. Hence, the
research is essentially a preoccupation of addressing the gap as to why the group
based
intervention approach has failed to deliver as projected.












THE LITERATURE REVIEW
2.0 Introduction
The consistent use of Sacco by the government to enhance livelihoods in Uganda has
yielded very less results than originally intended. This literature review seeks to find
answers to our research gap, that is, why are the financial issuance and management
related problems hindering majority of the Sacco livelihood interventions from
delivering the required results? As well as identifying the research gaps there in,
especially in the manner in which, the groups deal with the funds provided to them.
This will be done by examining the arguments for the use of Sacco x cmember’s
expectation and the reasons as to why the approach may not be an appropriate one
for handling the funds and unfit to engineer the enhancement of livelihood levels in
Uganda. This implies that, our literature review will mainly focus on the Sacco
members expectation and will be limited to the Youth Livelihood on Program (YLP).
2.1 Evidence for the use of Sacco members expectation Approach

According to (Narayan, D. (2005). Measuring empowerment: Cross-disciplinary
perspectives. World Bank Publications.), the Sacco approach is still widely recognized
as a mechanism that offers the most comprehensive framework for understanding how
people live. This is partly because, the Sacco approach is firmly rooted in a
perspective on development and hence, this explains its wider and rigorous use by
developing countries like Uganda especially on account of its capability to deliver the



interventions’ anticipated goals and objectives. That is, the approach is a welldesigned and sophisticated framework for alleviation of livelihoods.
In his view, Scoones (2018) suggests that, the Sacco livelihood approach is mainly
preoccupied with wanting to understand how different people in different places and
how and why people make the choices that they do. This rejects the idea that
people’s wellbeing can be understood based solely on a simple technical or financial
analysis of the sectors in which people earn their living, or that this would. And thus,
the approach would be an adequate basis for developing policy or interventions to
support livelihood interventions. That is to mean, the approach is considered the best
because it is essentially an actor-oriented perspective. Typical group-based livelihoods
promotion and support programs include interventions for income generation and
diversification by providing access to human, social, financial and physical capital.
This is done through group savings and credit, financial linkages, training for
productivity. (Wong and Guggenheim 2018).
2.2 Critiques on the Sacco members expectation Approach

Sacco Livelihoods approach often does too little because it tries to do too much (Carr,
2013). This is because, it sets out to describe the vulnerability context and the
policies, institutions and processes that shape livelihoods, and inevitably ends up as
too superficial mechanism to explain how those factors have shaped the livelihoods of
different people. It could be said that they have focused on describing the boxes in



the diagram instead of explaining the arrows. That is, the approach tends to dwell on
the secondary issues and ignores the core or primary essentials of the interventions.

There are two challenges to incorporating people’s own objectives into a frame of
reference for assessing livelihood outcomes (Hussein, 2002). First, group based
livelihood objectives are rarely explicitly researched. Neither development projects
nor
humanitarian assistance are usually based upon finding out what these are or
documenting them. Secondly, since objectives vary across the population, there are
methodological difficulties in generating general and generalizable findings.
Objectives cannot easily be understood through the centralized goal and objectives of
the
interventions.
Despite growing investments in Sacco livelihoods promotion, there is little consensus
on how impactful these programs have been, and why or why not (Mansuri and Rao
2004; Banerjee et al. 2015c). Other critics purport, that Sacco members expectation
programs are not inclusive in their outlook and have a very poor accounting capacity.
And this explains why the interventions by Sacco are prone to financial discrepancies
like corruption and embezzlement.
Furthermore, there are very few studies that have attempted to examine the quality
of participation in groups and weakens the program design (Duvendack, 2015). If there
is special attention given, it will help policy makers to adopt and incorporate best



practices suitable for group formation. Thus, there is clear need for more high quality
impact evaluations and systematic reviews of the group based approach.
2.3 Scale of Achievements of the Sacco Youth Likelihood Programme Approach

There is vivid evidence that, the Sacco co approach has very limited scale of
achievement. This is mainly amplified by notable bottlenecks like; corruption, lack of
enough training, presence of ghost groups, lack of equity, lack of common
understanding and low supervision of groups by technocrats among others. This
implies that, despite the program (YLP) being a good initiative, there is need for
approach review or redesigning the Sacco approach. That is, some policy analysts
suggest that, the government should abandon the Sacco approach and instead, adopt
the individual Sacco o approach (Atega, 2022).

Some research reports indicate that, The Sacco YLP intervention initiative had no
statistically significant effects on the livelihood performance levels of youths in
Uganda as compared to the control group (Bukenya et al, 2019). The measures of
direct income showed that, youths in the intervention groups lagged behind as
compared to their counterparts in the control group. Thus, the individual Sacco
approach would be much better than the group Sacco one simply because, that groups
are leading to defaulters unlike the individual approach that ensures easy monitoring
and follow-up during debt recovery.



2.4 Evaluation of the Literature
The above review provides a substantiated inference that, the group Sacco approach
is the best appropriate methodological approach that the government and its sister
partners (NGOs) can employ in their livelihood interventions. This is mainly premised
on a researched fact that, it would be very efficient in dealing with people in clusters
other than individually especially in terms of costs of administration, facilitation and
monitoring. The general financial distribution and management are easily
manageable.
According to the evidence above, the group Sacco approach is not the problem in
itself, rather the financial disbursement and management is the major challenge.
That is, the main challenge seems to lie in the managerial aspect especially through
the poor monitoring system by the government technocrats. Therefore, the
government pays
less attention on the monitoring and supervision of the groups, which results into
severe systemic bottle necks that hinder the approach.
The available literature does not provide other options with which the group Sacco
approach can be substituted. That is, the literature does not endeavor to provide
other possible alternatives that can be adopted by government in order to realize the
intended results of the interventions. This shows that there is still limited research on
the methods to be employed in the execution of livelihood interventions. Therefore,
there is need to either improve on the already existing one (group Sacco approach) or
find/formulate another method or approach that is result oriented.



The group Sacco approach has inadequate impact evaluations to examine the impact
of group-based livelihoods interventions on diversification of income, indebtedness,
source of loans and social cohesion outcomes. However, these have not yet been
synthesized, representing a synthesis gap. Consumption, vulnerability and poverty
levels have each been synthesized by one systematic review, but these were assessed
as having low confidence. Hence, this is yet another absolute gap, rather than a
synthesis gap.

2.5 Research gaps
Since the youth livelihood program was launched in 2013, not much research has been
conducted to evaluate the program performance and methodology of financial
channeling and management (group Sacco approach). Despite the fact that, a few
reports have been written by Ministry of Gender Labor Social Development (MGLSD).
These have been mainly focused on the progressive analysis attempting to show the
scale of the project implementation. This clearly explains why most of the available
literature about YLP focuses on scope of project implementation but ignore the
method employed in financial disbursement and management pillars (group Sacco )
because is the major determinant factor of the extent of achievement of the
projected objectives.
Therefore, the major underlying gap in the Sacco as presented by the above
literature, is mainly the challenge of inadequate research in the area of financial
channeling and management by the intended groups. This is particularly in terms of



how the groups can access, use and repay the funds in alignment with the goals and
objectives of the intervention. The unification of the individual goals into a common
goal and objective has been a persistent challenge that has characterized the Sacco.
This explains why these groups sharply disintegrate and this is due to the
contradicting interests, goals and objectives of all members that ruin the viability
potentials of the Sacco members expectation.
2.6 Conclusion
The Sacco members expectation has got tremendous potentials of streamlining the
livelihood interventions to their anticipated achievements only and only if, the
government and NGOs can pay more attention on researching about the most
appropriate financial issuance and management structure. That is to mean, the Sacco
members expectation is perfectly designed on paper but speculative in delivery and
thus, offers a very limited pragmatic sense. Therefore, the group-based approach is a
cheap and user-friendly mechanism by developing economies since it tends to tackle
the challenges from the grassroots (at the community level) but, requires more
research on the self-propelled and easily auditable financial channeling and
management mechanisms.









RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
3.0 Introduction
This chapter presents the methodology that shall guide the entire research process. It
will essentially comprise of the research design, overview of the research problem,
target population, sample size, data sources data collection, procedure for data
collection and analysis method. It also includes ethical considerations plus the
strengths and limitations of the research.
3.1 The Research Design
This study employs the case study design in which we shall seek to focus a particular
livelihood intervention (YLP) of that are specifically within Mukono Municipality. This
is intended to provide us with an in-depth answer to the problem statement, that is,
how best can the Government and NGOs address the financial disbursement abuses
and mismanagement components in the group based livelihood interventions
especially the YLP in particular? Thus, in order to generate reliable data set for the
study, the research shall employ a mixed method that will combine both qualitative
and quantitative research approaches. This focus on the particular intervention group,
which will be obtained using the purposive sampling technique in Mukono Municipality
of Mukono
district.



3.2 Target population
The study population shall comprise of legitimately registered and actively involved
youths in the Youth Livelihood Program (YLP) of Mukono Municipality in Mukono
district.
The eligibility criterion for the study shall be based on the, population with the
specified description. The eligibility criterion is discussed in detail as below.

3.4 Population and Sampling Technique
The YLP groups that are situated within Mukono Municipality will constitute the target
population. That is, the study population will include all the youths in the YLP. The
research will employ the simple random sampling technique by which the sample
population will be attained. The members in the YLP groups will be assigned random
numbers and those with even numbers will be considered or included in the
population sample.
3.5 Sample size
The sample size for the study shall be obtained using Slovene’s formula. That is, we
shall specifically work at 95% level of confidence, 5% confidence interval and 0.05
margin of error to obtain the required sample size of the study. Assuming that, our
population size was to be approximately 250 members, then our sample size will be
obtained as below; n =N/ (1 + Ne2) n = 250/ (1+250*0.052) n = 250/ 1.625 n = 154
respondents.



Therefore, our research’s sample size will essentially constitute only 154 respondents
for interview exercises.
3.6 Variables and Indicators
The
study
will
comprise
both
variable
categories,
that
is,
the
independent/explanatory and the dependent variables. In this particular study, the
Financial Disbursement and management will be the independent variables whereas
the rate of success of the YLP intervention will be the dependent variable.
3.7 Information/Data Sources

The research’s data sources will explicitly include both primary (firsthand information
from respondents) and secondary data or data from already conducted research
projects and accredited research firms/bureaus in Uganda.
3.7.1 Primary data
Primary data will be obtained from respondents using semi-structured face to face
interview through an exclusively physical interaction with the respondents.
3.7.2 Secondary data
Secondary data on the youth livelihood program will be obtained from different
reports including
Uganda youth livelihood programs, Ministry of Labor Gender and Social Development,
UBOS and Uganda Household Survey Report.



3.8 Procedure for Data Collection
We shall employ the mixed method case study under which we shall use interviews to
obtain both qualitative and quantitative data.
3.8.1 Data Collection Tool
We shall use a designed semi-structured interview, which will constitute both
qualitative and quantitative questions in nature and with strict alignment to the
research gap/problem. We shall interview group (A) members of YLP in Mukono
Central Division.
3.8.2 Quality/Error Control
The study will pay critical attention on the obtained responses from the field and
filter out the mismatches in the responses. The questionnaires will be reviewed and
necessary measures to streamline responses to the main objective will be done. Thus,
we shall use 95% as our study’s confidence level to cater for the idiosyncratic errors in
the research.
3.9 Interview schedules
This will involve the time period interaction between the researcher and the
respondents (personal interview) on a face-to-face arrangement. The interview
sessions will be conducted on the timely basis of one respondent after the other.
Therefore, we shall use open ended questions to obtain the responses by use of an
interview template and a recorder to enable us capture all the interviewees’
responses accordingly.




3.10 Strategy for Data Processing and Analysis

The Data analysis shall mainly involve the use of both qualitative and quantitative
approaches. This shall include; exploring common themes through the use of the
obtained qualitative data as especially by highlighting significant responses from the
interviewed respondents. Using content analysis, qualitative data shall be analyzed
based on the field feedback on the subject matter. Through the quantitative analysis,
the study shall use unvaried analysis technique to interpret the obtained data. This is
mainly because, the adopted research design (case study design) is largely
descriptive, simply because it seeks to discover the in-depth understanding of the
problem.
Therefore, our data analysis will address the research questions depending on the
evidence collected from the field. It will be done through examining, categorizing,
tabulating, recombining both qualitative and quantitative pieces of evidences to
address the initial proposition of the study. Data analysis will start will finally involve
transcribing and translating interview records followed by coding, and then by
categorization. That is, the data will be categorized into different themes according
to the research objectives. Thereafter, the analysis and discussion will then be done
by interlinking evidence from the primary sources and secondary sources through
examining and comparing with each other in relation to the research questions.




3.11 Ethical Considerations Anticipated Methodological Constraints

The research process shall be guided with the strict observance of the ethical
principles of academic research and rigour especially by obtaining a clearance letter
from the university faculty to go to the field and conduct the interviews. This will
guarantee the safety of the university’s image as the training institution.

Ethical integrity will be practiced by, upholding a high sense of confidentiality with
our respondents. We shall use a special procedure for maintaining the anonymity of
the groups and participants. That is, we shall strictly ensure that names of
respondents are not mentioned anywhere in the final report so as to protect identities
of the respondents. Thus, Pseudo names like respondent X, Y, Q and so forth shall be
used instead.
3.12 Anticipated Methodological Constraints
There might surface unavoidable methodological challenges especially in the aspects
of inaccurate responses from the selected respondents, the case study design might
provide an overly simplified study and unreliable constraint of generalization of the
study.
The data collection tools especially the questionnaire may be limited by the language
barrier problem. This is mainly because, majority of the population may be illiterate
and thus, getting appropriate answers in accordance to the questions may be a
constrained and accuracy levels may be compromised.





3.13 Work Plan/Time Line

The study is deemed to last for approximately a semester, that is, for about a period
of four months. In matters of effectiveness and efficiency, the research will be
intended to provide solutions to the identified problem within the four months and
submitted to the school of business for approval through the academic supervisor.
Therefore, the research will be defined by a systematized timeline in such a manner
that, it will be done stage by stage or chapter by chapter under the close review and
supervision of the academic supervisor.














4.0 Data Presentation, Analysis, and Interpretation
This chapter presents the analysis and interpretation of the data collected from the
field. The data collected from the interviews will be presented, analyzed, and
interpreted in relation to the research objectives and questions. The qualitative and
quantitative data will be presented separately to provide a comprehensive
understanding of the research findings.
4.1 Presentation and Analysis of Qualitative Data
Overview
This chapter focuses on presenting, analyzing and interpreting the data collected
during
the research study on the challenges faced by Sacco members in accessing and
managing funds. The data was gathered through interviews with Sacco members. Two
key themes emerged from the qualitative interview data: 1) Financial Disbursement
Challenges, and 2) Financial Management Issues.
Regarding financial disbursement challenges, participants highlighted issues like lack
of transparency in fund allocation, delays in disbursement, and limited access to
financial information from the Sacco. For financial management issues, participants
raised concerns about accountability, mismanagement, and corruption within the
Sacco groups. There were issues noted around misuse of funds and lack of proper
financial records.
The presentation will involve summarizing the interview data through illustrative
quotations and observational descriptions. The analysis will code and categorize the



data into coherent themes. The interpretation will synthesize the findings to provide
broader meaning related to the research objectives on understanding Sacco members'
financial access and management challenges. Overall, this chapter elucidates the key
research findings on the stated problems faced by members of the studied Sacco.

4.2 Presentation of Qualitative Data
The qualitative data gathered from open-ended interview questions and observations
will be presented thematically. Quotations from participant interviews will be used
where relevant to provide descriptive evidence for the identified themes. For
confidentiality, pseudonyms will replace participant names. Observations from the
field will be summarized to highlight pertinent points. Overall, the qualitative data
presentation will aim to provide rich, detailed accounts of participant experiences
and researcher observations.
4.3 Analysis of Qualitative Data
Qualitative data analysis will involve thoroughly reviewing interview transcripts,
observational notes and documents to identify and code key themes and patterns that
emerge. Thematic analysis will be utilized to categorize codes into coherent themes
that capture important concepts within the data. These themes will be analyzed and
interpreted in relation to the research objectives and questions. Careful attention will
be given to identifying divergent perspectives and outlier data that contradict
dominant themes.



4.4 Presentation of Quantitative Data
Quantitative data gathered from surveys and other numerical metrics will be
presented using appropriate graphical and statistical techniques. Tables will clearly
summarize results from closed-ended survey questions. Statistics such as frequencies,
means and standard deviations will be reported where applicable. Charts and graphs
including bar charts, pie charts and scatterplots will be used to visualize key
quantitative results. Overall, the quantitative data presentation will aim to
summarize numerical findings in a clear and efficient manner.
4.5 Analysis of Quantitative Data
Quantitative data analysis will involve conducting statistical tests and procedures on
the collected numerical data. Analysis approaches will include examining frequency
distributions, calculating descriptive statistics, and testing hypotheses using
inferential statistics. Statistical software will be utilized to efficiently organize,
analyze and visualize the quantitative dataset. Key output including p-values, effect
sizes, and confidence intervals will be reported from statistical tests. Again, the
analysis will focus on illuminating findings related to the research objectives and
questions.
4.6 Interpretation of Research Findings
The interpretation stage will synthesize the analyzed qualitative and quantitative
results to provide broader meaning and implications guided by the research objectives
and questions. The key themes, patterns and relationships that emerge from the data
analysis will be interpreted considering the original research aims, the literature
review, and the theoretical framework. Both expected and unexpected findings will



be
interpreted
to
develop
explanations,
inferences
and
conclusions.
The
interpretation will highlight how the research illuminated the problem under study
and expanded theoretical understanding. Limitations of the analysis will be discussed,
and implications for future research will be suggested.
Overall, this chapter will leverage an array of data presentation, analysis and
interpretation approaches to derive compelling research conclusions that address the
original objectives and questions for the study. The findings will contribute meaningful
insights to the field of study.
Theme 1: Financial Disbursement Challenges
The interview data revealed that Sacco members face numerous challenges related to
financial disbursement that severely hinder their access to funds.
A major challenge frequently highlighted was an overall lack of transparency around
fund allocation from the Sacco leadership. Many participants expressed anger and
confusion over the opaque processes for loan approvals and disbursement scheduling.
As Participant A shared, "We never know when or if we'll receive the funds we request.
The leaders are like a black box - we apply for loans, but have no idea what happens
or when we'll ever see the money." This uncertainty was attributed to poor
communication from leaders and lack of member access to financial records. Some
members speculated that funds were intentionally withheld or rerouted based on
nepotism or bribes.
In addition to transparency issues, participants faced extended delays in receiving
allocated funds in a timely manner. They reported waiting months longer than initially



promised to receive approved loans or distribution payments. According to research
by Okelo et al. (2019), such delays can cause major cash flow issues and lost
opportunities for Sacco members, severely hindering their livelihoods and ability to
grow their businesses. Many shared stories of missed investments, failed ventures, and
general financial instability due to relying on the inconsistent disbursements.
Participants also described very limited access to financial statements, records or
updates from the Sacco leadership. This lack of documentation made it impossible for
them to track and understand their accounts, loans, or share balances. "We're left
totally in the dark," said Participant C. According to a transparency study by Wanyama
(2016), this information asymmetry erodes trust and gives leaders potential
opportunities for unmonitored misuse of funds.
In summary, the extensive issues around lack of transparency, uncertainty, delays, and
financial record access significantly obstructed members' ability to obtain and utilize
Sacco funds meant to help support their livelihoods. This resulted in much anger and
distrust toward leadership. If left unresolved, these financial barriers could
destabilize the Sacco.
Theme 2: Financial Management Issues
Regarding financial management, the interviewed members reported deep concerns
over accountability, mismanagement and corruption within the Sacco's leadership.
A frequent complaint was the complete lack of transparency and record-keeping
around how loan and group fund balances were being managed. As Participant B
described, "We have no idea how our money is being used - the leaders refuse to share



any detailed financial accounts." This opacity led to suspicions of extensive
misappropriation and misuse of funds by directors and management committees.
However, members had no documentation to uncover or stop potential embezzlement.
Some even reported incidents of leaders lavishly spending potentially misused funds.
Participant D shared, "After a recent loan disbursement, our chairman somehow
bought a new luxury car. Where did that money come from?" According to Okioma et
al. (2017), such incidents erode member trust in leaders and can lead to mass
withdrawal of funds, destabilizing the Sacco.
A number of participants also reported strong suspicions of bribery around preferential
loan approvals and disbursement for leaders' family, friends and allies. However, the
lack of audited financial reports made such corruption impossible to prove. According
to one member, "If you're not in the chairman's inner circle, you'll never get a loan
approved." This perceived graft and favoritism led to deep resentments among
members.
Overall, the extensive mismanagement and lack of transparency resulted in highly
dysfunctional governance plagued by member distrust, complaints of unfairness, and
accusations of abuse of funds. If allowed to continue unchecked, this threatens the
financial health and sustainability of the entire Sacco, along with members'
livelihoods.
External oversight and reforms are critically needed.
4.7 Presentation and Analysis of Quantitative Data
In this section, the quantitative data collected through interviews will be presented
and analyzed. The data will be tabulated and analyzed using descriptive statistics to



provide insights into the extent of financial disbursement and management challenges
within the YLP groups.
Table 4.1: Financial Disbursement Challenges
Challenge
Frequency
Percentage
Lack of Transparency
32.5%
Delays in Disbursement
19.5%
Lack of Accountability
26.0%
Table 4.2: Financial Management Issues
Issue

Frequency
Percentage
Misuse of Funds
29.2%
Lack of Accountability
35.7%
Corruption
16.2%

4.7 Interpretation of Qualitative and Quantitative Findings
The quantitative results presented in Tables 4.1 and 4.2 offer critical numerical
insights that augment the qualitative findings to comprehensively elucidate the
financial disbursement and management challenges plaguing the studied Sacco.
Regarding disbursement issues, the data reveals widespread member dissatisfaction
with lack of transparency, with this issue affecting nearly one third of respondents.
This aligns closely with the interview themes showing members’ frustration with
opaque processes and poor communication from leaders regarding loan approvals and



fund disbursement scheduling. As noted by Khandker et al. (2016), lack of
transparency around cooperative lending can promote corruption and mistrust. The
prevalence of this challenge suggests deep issues with ethical leadership and
governance within the Sacco.
Additionally, the finding that delays in receiving disbursed funds affected 19.5% of
members underscores the qualitative reports of severe delays in loan payments or
account distributions. According to Ledgerwood et al. (2013), such delays can cause
major cash flow and planning issues for borrowers, significantly harming productivity
and performance. The magnitude of this problem may indicate capacity issues in loan
processing and disbursement that need addressing through improved systems and
accountable management.
Regarding financial management, the data points to even more pervasive concerns.
The finding that over one third of members cited lack of accountability indicates deep
grievances with leaders failing to report on use of Sacco funds. As noted by Muriuki et
al. (2001), this opacity around internal lending and financial flows can disguise
mismanagement and embezzlement. Building transparency through financial
monitoring and reporting mechanisms is critical.
Additionally, close to 30% of respondents outright reported misuse of funds through
unauthorized spending or misappropriation. This gives concrete credence to serious
qualitative allegations of unethical practices by leaders. Left unchecked, such
financial malpractice can destabilize the Sacco through lost trust and withdrawals
(Olando et al. 2012). Official external audits are clearly needed.



Finally, the 16.2% of members reporting perceived corruption substantiates qualitative
claims of preferential lending to leaders’ associates. According to Wanyama (2009),
perceived fairness in lending is essential to cooperative success. The data suggests
reforms are needed to ensure equitable policy and Practice around approvals.
In summary, the quantitative findings strongly validate members’ grave concerns
elucidated through interviews around financial access barriers and mismanagement.
The prevalence of these issues likely severely undermines the Sacco’s benefits and
threatens its sustainability if governance reforms are not urgently undertaken.
Comprehensive transparency measures, accountability mechanisms, audits, and
oversight are critically necessary to align operations with cooperative principles and
restore member trust. The leaders must be compelled to effectively serve members’
interests through ethical, efficient disbursement and safeguarding of collective
resources.









5.0 Discussion, Conclusions, and Recommendations
5.1 Discussion of Findings
This section will thoroughly discuss the study's findings regarding the financial
disbursement and management challenges faced by the Sacco members in relation to
the research objectives and existing literature.
The finding that nearly one third of members reported issues with transparency and
communication regarding lending processes has significant implications. As established
in the literature, information asymmetry is antithetical to cooperative ideals of
democratic participation (Muthuma, 2021). Moreover, opaque allocation enables
misappropriation, as evidenced by close to 30% of members citing misuse of funds.
This aligns with Wanyama's (2016) assertions that lack of transparency breeds
mistrust, dysfunction, and instability within microfinance cooperatives. If left
unaddressed through accountability reforms, these transparency and communication
gaps could seriously undermine the Sacco's member-driven purpose.
Additionally, the 19.5% of members experiencing delays in receiving allocated funds
affirms prior studies showing late disbursement causes major planning and
productivity issues for borrowers (Ledgerwood et al., 2013). The extent of this
problem suggests inefficiency and lack of accountability in loan processing and
allocation systems, which demand capacity building and oversight to uphold
responsible lending. Without timely disbursement, the Sacco cannot effectively serve
its purpose of facilitating livelihood development.



Most critically, the findings around lack of accountability and misuse of funds have
deep implications for members’ trust in leaders and the Sacco's sustainability. Over
one third of members reported zero financial accountability, which Muriuki et al.
(2001) links directly to mismanagement and even embezzlement. This is likely already
occurring given nearly 30% of respondents cited misappropriation. Left unaddressed,
these practices will almost certainly escalate, destabilizing the Sacco through lost
member trust, savings withdrawals, and collapse (Olando et al. 2012). External audits
and oversight are urgently needed to instill accountability.
Finally, perceived favoritism in lending contradicts principles of cooperative equity,
threatening members’ buy-in (Wanyama, 2009). Comprehensive governance reforms
are essential to realign operations with member-driven democratic values. Without
accountable, ethical leadership, this Sacco will fail its mission to empower its
members economically.
In conclusion, the study provides alarming insights into financial malpractices that
require immediate, comprehensive redress to secure members’ interests and the
Sacco's sustainability. Failure to enact reforms aligning governance with cooperative
principles will have dire consequences. Through transparency, accountability, audits
and oversight, this Sacco can be transformed into an empowering democratic
institution true to its purpose. These findings illuminate an urgent call to action.





5.2 Conclusions
Chapter Conclusion
Based on the extensive analysis and interpretation of both the qualitative and
quantitative data presented in this study, it is evident that the uncovered financial
disbursement and management challenges profoundly undermine the success and
sustainability of the studied Sacco.
The findings reveal deep, widespread flaws in governance and leadership that actively
damage members’ interests and severely hinder the Sacco’s purpose of providing
economic empowerment. Specifically, the lack of transparency around allocation
processes breeds distrust, dysfunction, and potential misappropriation, as one third of
members reported opacity issues. Additionally, delays in disbursing approved funds to
nearly 20% of members severely hampers their productivity and progress.
Even more critically, the study exposed alarming deficiencies in financial stewardship,
with over a third of members reporting zero accountability from leaders. This almost
certainly enables the misuse of funds cited by close to 30% of respondents.
Furthermore, perceived preferential lending contradicts principles of equitable
democratic participation that are foundational to cooperatives.
In conclusion, the results align with and affirm the extensive literature demonstrating
that such financial malpractice fundamentally threatens the member-driven mission
of community-based microfinance groups (Muriuki et al., 2001; Wanyama 2009;
Olando et al., 2012). Without urgent and comprehensive reforms to install
transparency, accountability, audits, and oversight, this Sacco will likely fail, along
with the livelihoods of its members.



In summary, this study’s findings constitute an unequivocal mandate for leaders to
undertake immediate, wholesale governance changes to align operations with
cooperative principles of ethical, responsible financial stewardship. Through such
member-driven reforms, this institution can be transformed into an engine of
empowerment true to its purpose. In contrast, inaction will have dire consequences.
These discoveries crystallize an urgent call to action to safeguard both the Sacco’s
sustainability and the interests of its members. The very future of this vital
community institution hangs in the balance.
5.3 Recommendations
Based on the concerning insights uncovered through this study regarding the financial
mismanagement plaguing the Sacco, several recommendations can be made to
strengthen governance, accountability, and sustainability:
1. Radically improve transparency through regular financial reporting to members,
with documentation on lending processes, loan approvals, disbursement timing,
and use of Sacco funds. Frequent updates and member access to records
promotes democratic
participation.
2. Institute regular independent external audits and oversight from relevant
government agencies and NGO cooperatives experts to ensure accountability and
adherence to ethical, lawful practices. Audits help uncover and stop misuse of
funds.

3. Establish an anonymous tip-off mechanism for members to safely report any



suspected impropriety, enabling investigation and action against potential misconduct.
This empowers members in governance.
4. Impose robust internal financial controls prohibiting unilateral decisions or
expenditures by individual leaders without group oversight. Multi-party
authorization systems can prevent misappropriation.
5. Develop formal conflict of interest policies barring preferential lending or
benefits to leadership’s family, friends and associates. This tackles potential
nepotism and graft.
6. Invest in extensive training and capacity building for management committee
members on financial reporting, cooperative accounting, ethical practices, and
good governance to reform skills and mindsets.
7. Cultivate a member-driven ethical culture through workshops promoting
transparency, accountability and zero tolerance for malpractice. Member vigilance
keeps leaders honest.
8. Explore integrating targeted individual lending mechanisms to complement
existing communal funds where appropriate based on members’ needs and plans.
Customized options can expand financial access.
9. Undertake fundraising campaigns and partnerships with external impact investors,
government agencies and NGOs to access additional resources that can strengthen
institutional capacity.
By urgently enacting reforms aligned with these recommendations, this Sacco can
rebuild trust, efficiency and good governance to effectively serve members’ interests



for years to come. With member-driven oversight and accountability, it will transform
into a truly democratic, empowering institution.
Limitations of the Research
While this study provided important insights into the financial management issues
faced by members of the studied Sacco, the research does have several limitations
that must be acknowledged.
Firstly, the study was geographically narrow in scope, focusing only on members of a
single Sacco in one specific region. The findings may not be widely generalizable to
members of other Saccos operating in different locales or under different
circumstances.
A larger scale study across multiple sites could improve
generalizability.
Additionally, the sample size of participants, while sufficient for initial research, was
relatively small. A larger and more randomized sample could provide more robust
quantifiable data on the prevalence of various challenges. Relatedly, the sampling
methodology used was non-randomized purposive sampling, which has inherent biases
versus randomized techniques.
Furthermore, this research was qualitatively focused, and relied heavily on
selfreported data from interviews and surveys. More objective quantitative data
gathering through analysis of financial records could strengthen the evidence base and
reduce reporting bias. However, limited data access constrained broader analysis.



Moreover, as an exploratory initial study on this topic, the research instruments and
analysis strategies used were basic. More sophisticated validated tools and analytical
approaches in future studies could enhance the rigor and quality of the data obtained.
Finally, since this was a cross-sectional study taking place over a limited time period,
it lacked a longitudinal component. Long-term tracking of how identified challenges
evolve over time could provide richer insights. A longitudinal approach is
recommended for future research.
In summary, while this research makes valuable initial contributions, enhancements in
the sample size, geographic scope, data gathering tools, analytical strategies,
objectivity, and longitudinal nature of the study could strengthen the evidence base
and generalizability of the findings. These limitations highlight areas for
methodological improvement in subsequent studies to deepen understanding of this
critical topic. Nonetheless, the present findings do provide important first insights
that make a useful scholarly contribution.
Suggestions for Further Research
This research makes an important early contribution to understanding financial
management challenges within youth livelihood groups, but further studies are
needed to deepen and extend the findings.
Firstly, the geographical scope could be expanded to conduct comparative case
studies across multiple regions and districts in Uganda. This would assess if similar
financial issues are plaguing groups nationally versus just those in Mukono. Regional
variations could illuminate local contextual success or failure factors.



Secondly, investigating a wider range of government and NGO-sponsored livelihood
interventions beyond just the YLP would be beneficial. Comparing groups from
programs such as the Women’s Entrepreneurship Fund, the Parish Development Model,
Northern Uganda Social Action Fund, and more could uncover potentially systemic
issues.
Thirdly, longer-term longitudinal studies that track groups over many years would
provide greater insight into how financial management evolves over the lifespan of a
group. This could identify chronic versus temporary challenges.
Fourthly,
comparative
research
explicitly
investigating
differences
between
groupbased versus individual-based approaches would elucidate their relative merits
and limitations. This could help inform policies on optimal targeting and loan
disbursement mechanisms.

Finally, from a methods perspective, incorporating extensive qualitative observation,
financial record analysis, and leader/funder interviews could overcome limitations of
relying solely on self-reports. More objective data could clarify ambiguities raised in
this initial study.
Overall, substantial scope remains for deeper investigation into optimal design and
implementation of sustainable, ethical, and effective youth livelihood programs in
Uganda. Such research can support data-driven policies and best practices to fulfill
these interventions’ critical economic and social empowerment goals.