Child sponsorship programs are initiatives run by various non-profit organizations and charities
to support and improve the lives of children in need. These programs aim to provide financial
assistance and essential resources to children living in poverty or difficult circumstances,
typically in developing countries. While the available literature might be limited to only the
benefits of Child sponsorship programs on host communities as a form of community
development, there is little literature on the role played by child sponsorship projects on the
welfare of beneficiaries. Specifically, no such study has been conducted on compassion
international in Bweyogerere. Consequently, this research sought to examine the impact of
compassion international child sponsorship on the welfare of beneficiaries sponsored under the
program. The specific objectives pursued were three: To investigate the impact of child
sponsorship on the beneficiaries’ access to formal education, to explore the impact of child
sponsorship on the protection of the beneficiary children’s rights in Bweyogerere and to
investigate the impact of child sponsorship on the social welfare of the beneficiaries in
Bweyogerere. A sample of 200 respondents was purposively selected from a population of 500
project beneficiaries, composed of project ongoing students and alumni. Structured
questionnaires, document review, beneficiary and key informant interviews and field-based
observation were used to collect data. Validity was ensured through expert reviews while
reliability analysis was carried out using Cronbach’s alpha coefficient. Quantitative data was
analyzed using both descriptive and inferential statistics while qualitative data was transcribed,
analyzed and reported. The study concluded that prior to the project many children within the
project area of operation did not have access to formal education, their rights were not protected
and their social welfare was poor. However, upon being enrolled into compassion international
child sponsorship program, the beneficiaries were able to get access to formal education, their
rights were protected and their social welfare improved. The study concluded that the
compassion international child sponsorship program played a critical role in the welfare of the
beneficiaries. The research therefore recommended that compassion international child
sponsorship program should improve more on their objectives in order to ensure more
effectiveness in accessing formal education, healthcare and food by enrolled beneficiaries.

CHAPTER ONE