The sole purpose of this study was to assess ICT services and financial performance of
commercial banks, a case study of Centenary bank, Mukono branch. The objectives of the study
were to find out the effect of ATMs on performance of Centenary bank, Mukono branch, to find
out the effect of online banking on performance of Centenary bank, Mukono branch, to analyze
the challenges affecting ICT services at Centenary bank, Mukono branch.
A descriptive research design was used to obtain information and focused on a target population
of 50 employees while using a selection of only 44 employees as the sample size. Data was
collected from both primary and secondary sources with employment of questionnaires and
interview guides as instruments to collect primary data. Secondary data like theoretical
framework was compiled from existing scholarly work and others like definitions were compiled
from google scholar search engine.
It was concluded that there is a positive significant relationship between; (1) automatic teller
machine with a positive correlation coefficient of 0.426* and (2) online banking with a positive
correlation coefficient of 0.433* on the financial performance of Centenary bank, Mukono
branch. The correlation of the different observations means any change in the usage of
independent variables will cause a change in financial performance. For example, an
increase/decrease in usage of online banking can lead to an increase/decrease in financial
efficiency thus making overall the relationship to be predictive.
It was recommended to the management of Centenary bank, Mukono branch that;
i.
A better system to monitor all ATM transactions should be developed.
ii.
An effective mobile banking system should be redeveloped or advanced to minimize the
level of fraud.
iii. Should promote e-banking workshops and training to their customers to make them userfriendly as it argued that it would encourage many clients to buy e-banking products and
grow trust in e-banking.

CHAPTER ONE