The purpose of carrying this research was to examine the effect of Internal Control System on
Service delivery in the hotel industry focusing on the Source of the Nile Hotel Jinja. The
research was guided by three objectives namely, to establish the effect of control environment on
service delivery, to assess the effect of risk assessment on service delivery and to examine the
effect of control activities on service delivery. The research adopted a descriptive cross-sectional
study design with a quantitative method to carry out the investigation. The findings of the study
showed that most of respondent agree that the control environment has an effect on service
delivery in the hotel industry. In the same they generally agree that also risk assessment has a
tremendous effect on service delivery, and it was also ascertained that most respondents agree
that control activities also have huge effect on service delivery in the hotel industry. The findings
further confirmed that there was a moderately strong relationship between the factors of Internal
Control systems and the level of service delivered in the hotel industry.
In conclusion, it can be asserted that Internal control system comprising of the control
environment and control procedures need to be adopted by all directors and management of
hotels so as to achieve its objectives by ensuring practical, orderly and efficient conduct of the
organization.
It was recommended that the hotel owners needed to adopt the highest level of asset monitoring
software to help it curb fraud coming as a result of misappropriated hotel assets and finances,
that hotel supervisors be given adequately high payment and a strict code of conduct so that they
do continuous monitoring and evaluation aimed at keeping a very high standard of operation at
the hotel, that security systems and all necessary apparatus needed to be upgraded, through
adopting things like online surveillance cameras, drones, and screening of all bags and likely
areas of bleaching internal control procedures. Similarly it was also recommended that best
customers be awarded tokens of appreciation on a yearly basis like trips abroad, television sets,
phones so that customer’s level of satisfaction is increased.
The areas of further study included; the need to research on the effect of credit accessibility on
capitalization of Small and Medium Enterprises, to examine the relationship between
maintaining an effective supply chain on the profitability of a company, and also to research on
the role of an effective organizational structure on the performance of an organization.

1 | P a g e

CHAPTER ONE

1.0 Introduction
This chapter contains the background of the study, statement of the problem, purpose and
objectives of the study, research questions, justification of the study, scope of the study,
significance of the study and the conceptual framework.

1.1 Background of the study
Internal Control Systems in accounting and auditing refers to a process of assuring achievement
of an organization’s objective in terms of realizing operational effectiveness and efficiency
which captures aspects such as reliable financial reporting, compliance with laws and the
regulation of policies (Mugambi, 2014). In the broader concept, this entirely involves the entire
process of controlling risks in an organization.
The study was guided by Stewardship Theory and Agency Theory. It actually plays a very
critical role in understanding the entire dynamics that govern institutional behavior at all times. It
emphasizes primarily in the analysis of the co-existence reasons of the non-economic but trust
based relationships in organizations which could arise from the principal agent interest (Corbetta
& Salvato, 2004). The stewardship approach encompasses the belief and the commitment to
some set of ideals that are displayed both by the principal and the agent (Albanese, Dacin &
Harris, 1997). In as much as the stewardship attitude among the actors of the organization
compensates for the inadequacies realized in the Agency theory, it is faced with its own
challenges when it is actually applied to some business context organizations. Ramachandran
(2007) argues that in a family of controlled business, both the Agency and the Stewardship
theory interplays a familial context. These theories determine the correct combination between
the agency and stewardship theories from different perspectives of institutional growth.
Organizations should respond to the system which is controlled so as to provide the rationale for
the possible conflict that can develop between the principal (shareholders) and the agent
(management). Taita-Taveta National Treasury board of directors as stewards of the company
must ensure the long-term viability of the company by making the organization realize it
objectives (Coombs & Gilley, 2005) and harmonizing the interests of the organization with those
of the interest groups.

2 | P a g e

Internal control system is a topical issue following global fraudulent financial reporting and
accounting scandals in both developed and developing countries (Mattie & Cassidy, 2002).
According to COSO (2004), Internal Control is a system consisting of specific policies and
procedures designed to provide management with reliable assurance that the goals and objectives
it believes important to the entity will be met. In their view, the reasons to have internal controls
is to promote operational effectiveness and efficiency, provide reliable financial and
administrative information, safeguard assets and records, encourage adherence to prescribed
policies and compliance with regulatory agencies.
Globally, Internal control is a key component of the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act (FCPA) of
1977 and the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, which required upgrades in inward control in United
States open companies Meaghan and Nick, (2012).
In Africa, (Adeoye M and Adeoy, 2014) “Internal control system is a topical issue following
global fraudulent financial reporting and accounting scandals in both developed and developing
countries”. For any organization to maximize its finances and safeguard its assets, it must be able
to manage its business processes which are one reason why ICs are very crucial. The subject of
internal controls is not new but then there have been series of fraudulent practices both in the
past and in recent times.

1.2 Statement of the Problem
The hospitality industry has a long colorful history beginning with inns, and lodges, and growing
into the hospitality industry as stated by Michael and Richard (2016). An incredible change in
the industry of tourism in the world brought many changes in the field of hotel business. This
means, the expansion and development of travel has contributed a lot for the development of
hotel industry. On the contrary, businesses in Source of the Nile Hotel Uganda couldn’t achieve
their objective due to the fact their internal control systems are weak. These internal control
problem are more obvious in particular business sectors, such as the hotels business from the
hospitality industry, which is one of the most growing sectors worldwide as mentioned by Politis
et al. Further, globalization of economy, technological advancements, complexity of business,
businesses failures and allegations of fraudulent financial reporting have recently sharpened the
ever-increasing attention to internal controls Karagiorgos et al. Because of, business without

3 | P a g e

internal control is just a business not craft fashion shortly to achieve objectives, under no
circumstances have a prospect to detect fraudulent activities, and demonstrate poor revenue as
confirmed by Kumar & Sharma. (2019). It’s therefore upon this background that the research
intends to investigate the effect of the internal control systems on service delivery.

1.3 General Objective
The main objective of the study was to examine the effect of Internal Control System on Service
delivery in hotel industry focusing on Source of the Nile Hotel Jinja.

1.4 Specific Objectives
The following are the specific objectives of the study;
a) To establish the effect of Control Environment on Service Delivery in the study Context.
b) To assess the effect of Risk Assessment on Service Delivery in the study Context.
c) To examine the effect of Control activities on Service Delivery in the study context.

1.5 Research questions
a) What is the effect of control Environment on Service Delivery in the Study Context?
b) What is the effect of Risk Assessment on Service Delivery in the Study Context?
c) What is the effect of Control activities on Service Delivery in the study context?

1.6 Scope of the study
1.6.1 Area scope:
The study was carried out at Source of the Nile Hotel Jinja branch, the location has been
considered because the area was convenient to the researcher when it comes to data collection.
1.6.2 Content Scope:
The study covered the types of ICS together with ICS dimensions /constructs with their
influences or functionality on service delivery in private organizations.

4 | P a g e

1.6.3 Time Scope:
The study used a cross sectional study. The period of the study i.e. the period within which data
was to be considered and collected at a point in time from 2020/2022 FY. The researcher chose
this year because this was relatively the year when a lot of financial transactions took place in
Source of the Nile Hotel Jinja. The study took a period of three months the reason being
ignorance of some respondents, inadequate finance and unfavorable weather.

1.7 Justification of the study

The study was determined to have the following justifications when completed: -
Student: The study is a requirement for partial fulfillment of award for a Bachelor’s degree in
Business Administration at Uganda Christian University.
Policy makers: It is to enable Source of the Nile Hotel policy makers redesign effective
measures, procedures and strategies on best ICSs / Financial Controls and get to know how best
they can achieve good service delivery in hotel industry as a response to the claims in their
monitoring reports. Via assisting The Source of the Nile Hotel policy makers in its redesigning,
it is to enable business men in the Hotel to completely do away with shoddy contracts and
kickbacks all of which would reduce their reputation thus profits resulting in reduced growth in
wealth.
Library Users and Scholars: This study is to be of immense benefit to academicians who need
information from this study as part of their literature review while carrying out other researches
on Financial Control and service delivery in the hotel industry.

5 | P a g e

1.8 Conceptual Framework for the study
The figure showing the conceptual framework is shown below;
Figure 1.1: The Role of Internal Control Systems on Service Delivery.
Independent Variable

Dependent variable

(Source: Adopted from Charles worth Author services, 2021)

The above is a conceptual framework that shows the relationship between Internal Control
Systems and service delivery. It is conceptualized that service delivery depends on Internal
Control Systems as means to improve. Service delivery has indicators of availability of quality
services, effectiveness, efficiency and achieved goals. The Internal Control System has
dimensions of control Environment, Risk assessment and Control Activities. It is therefore
hypothesized that a well-functioning internal control environment, positively contributes to
enhanced service delivery by the Extraneous Variable Level of revenue, Staff turnover,
Availability of infrastructure and assessment. Control activities and Risk Assessment. Similarly,
the framework suggests that efforts to conduct risk assessment positively contribute to enhanced
service delivery by the organization. Moreover, it is conceptualized that a well-functioning
internal control monitoring system positively contributes to enhanced service delivery by the
hotel. On the converse, weak internal control environment, risk assessment, and monitoring
constrain service delivery in the organization. Thus, any efforts to enhance service delivery should
focus on strengthening the internal control environment, risk assessment and monitoring.

Internal Control systems:
- Control Environment
- Risk Assessment
- Control Activities

Service Delivery
- Quality Services
- Effectiveness
- Efficiency
- Achieved goals

6 | P a g e

CHAPTER TWO

LITERATURE REVIEW
2.0 Introduction
Chapter two reviews internal control system studies and service delivery outcomes with a view
of providing theoretical answers to the study research questions based on previous studies and
identifying literature gaps to be filled. The first section presents the definition of key terms. The
empirical themes are based on the study objectives of control environment, risk assessment,
monitoring and service delivery.

2.1 Definition of key terms
This subsection defines the key concepts of internal control systems, its components, service
delivery and its associated indicators and how they are used in the study.

2.1.1 Internal control
Internal control may be defined as the whole system of controls, financial and otherwise,
established by the management in order to carry on the business of the company in an orderly
manner, safeguard its assets and secure as far as possible the accuracy and reliability of its
records. It has been observed that the concept of internal control goes beyond financial and
accountancy matters and the custody of company assets to include controls designed to improve
operational efficiency and ensure adherence to company policies. The board of directors should
have the responsibility for approving strategies and policies and ensuring that senior
management is monitoring the effectiveness of the Internal Control System (Basley, 2016).

Amudo and Inanga, (2009) define Internal control system as comprising of the control
environment and control procedures adopted by directors and management of an organization in
achieving its objectives by ensuring practical, orderly and efficient conduct of an organization.
This may include adherence to policies, safeguarding assets, prevention and detection of fraud
accuracy and competences of accounting records and timely preparation of financial reports.
According to Cieslewicz, (2006) Internal Control is defined as all the policies and procedures
adopted by the directors and management of an entity to assist in achieving their objective of
ensuring, as far as practicable, the orderly and efficient conduct of its business, including

7 | P a g e

adherence to internal policies, the safeguarding of assets, the prevention and detection of frauds.
According to Swamy (2014), internal controls in accounting system serves the function of
ensuring that all transactions carried out are suctioned and authorized by management. This is
important because all activities of the organization are performed in line with the laid down
policies. All transactions should be accounted for in the relevant books of accounts regularly,
achieved. The concept of reasonable assurance recognizes that no structure is perfect and that the
cost of the entity’s internal control should not exceed the benefits to be derived.

2.1.2 Service delivery
Service Delivery According to Parasuraman et al (2015), service quality is an attitude or
judgment concerning the excellence of a service rendered to a customer. In order for an
organization to be competitive, it must strive to attain a level of quality in services it delivers that
exceed the expectations of customers. The quality of service is a critical factor that determines
the success or failure of service organizations. As Moody (2005) states, Quality is the total
characteristics of an entity that bear on its ability to satisfy stated and implied needs.

Quality service implies the degree of excellence which infers to nil defect of a service or product.
Quality of service is also customer’s perception or judgment of the inconsistency between the
service provided and service expected (Caruana, 2002). Players in the hospitality and other
service industries are striving to discovery ways enhance their delivery of service that are
superior and capable of meeting customer requirements hence customer satisfaction. Apparently,
satisfying the needs of customers is a top priority of every hotel business organization that
recognizes customers as their greatest resource and reason for their survival. Within the
hospitality industry, businesses are investing incredible effort and time to assess and enhance the
quality of services they render to customers. This is because they understand the importances of
quality in ensuring customers are satisfied.

Delivery of quality services in a consistent manner is a sure way of the organization gaining a
competitive edge. The organization requires an informed understanding of the needs and
expectations of its customers and the types of what the customer’s perception of quality.
Furtherance to this, the organization should be fully aware of all factors that influence the desired

8 | P a g e

service level, adequate service level, and zone of tolerance which will help service organizations
consistently meet and exceed service expectations of customers. It is also important for the
organization to understand that customers compare the perceived quality of services with
expected quality of the same service. Therefore, service organizations must make deliberate
efforts to acquire the necessary knowledge about customer perceptions and the influence of
factors such as service encounter, service evidence, appearance and image of the service
organization and more importantly the customer’s perception of the price of the service.

9 | P a g e

2.2 The effect of Control Environment on Service Delivery
In Internal control, the control environment sets the tone of the organization by influencing the
control consciousness of its people (Whittington & Pany, 2001). Control environment is the
foundation for all the other components of internal control. It comprises of factors like; integrity
and ethical values of personnel tasked with creating, administering, and monitoring the controls,
commitment and competence of persons performing assigned duties, board of directors or audit
committees, management philosophy and operating style, and organizational structure.
Many factors go into control environment but this component is highly influenced by the
effectiveness of the board of directors, the management, and the audit division of the
organization. Internal auditors are essential to effective control environment since the
effectiveness of these factors largely depends on their interaction with the internal and external
auditor. Control environment sets the tone of an organization, influencing the control
consciousness of its people (Aldridge and Colbert, 1994). It reflects the attitude and policies of
management in regard to the importance of internal controls in revenue generation. In addition,
control environment is influenced by the history and the culture of organization and has an
insidious influence on the way organization activities are structured. It thus sets a positive and
supportive attitude toward internal control and conscientious management.
A review of extant literature shows that a number of studies have been carried out on control
environment Umar et al. (2018), investigated the effect of internal control systems on the
performance of commercial banks in Nigeria, a survey design was employed and 382
respondents selected using stratified random sampling. A questionnaire method was used to
collect data which was analyzed using Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS)
Version.
The findings of the study revealed a positive and significant relationship between control
environment and bank performance. Kayondo (2018) examined a study of Internal control
system and Service Delivery in the Health Service Sector of Uganda a Case of Masaka District
Local Government and objectives were on control environment, control activities, Monitoring
and evaluation and a case study design and had a study population of 202 and a sample size of
133 which was derived from the Krejcie and Morgan sampling table (1970). Stratified random
and purposive sampling methods were used by the researcher in data collection. The empirical

10 | P a g e

data was analyzed both quantitatively and qualitatively to examine the relationship between
internal controls and health service delivery. The findings of the study indicated that control
environment have a positive and significant effect on health service delivery.
Banura (2018) examined the relationship between internal control system and education service
delivery in Busia Municipal Council in his study. A case study design was adopted, a study
population consisted of 138 respondents and questionnaire, interview guide and documents
review methods were used to collect data, analysis was done using descriptive statistics of mean
and standard deviation, correlation and regression analysis.

The study found a moderate positive significant relationship between internal control
environment and hospitality service delivery. It sets the ambience of the enterprise through
impinging on the control awareness of its individuals (Whittington and Pany, 2001), and it is the
basis for every other internal control aspect. It embroils aspects like; truthfulness and moral
standards of people charged with crafting, overseeing, as well as evaluating the controls,
assurance and proficiency of people undertaking delegated tasks, administration viewpoint and
functional approach, as well as organizational structure. Several aspects discuss control
environment however this aspect is greatly impinged on by the Board of Directors’ efficiency,
the administration, and the enterprise’s audit unit. Internal auditors are key to the success of
control environment as the efficacy of these elements is greatly subject to their relationship with
the internal as well as external auditor. Control environment establishes the ambience of an
enterprise, impelling the control awareness of its entities (Aldridge and Colbert, 1994). Also, it is
influenced by the enterprise’s principles and history and takes a devious bearing on the manner
that an enterprise’s undertakings are organized.

In explaining the tenets of control environment in an organization, Kamau (2014) shows that
control environment includes a financial and accounting system, managerial commitment to
system operations, monitoring and implementation of internal control systems, and clear
channels of communication between supervisees and supervisors. Similarly, Josiah (2013) adds
that organizations with effective control environments report superior supervision of workers,
efficient operations, complete transaction reduced risks, proper coordination of departments, and
proper delegation. However, the benefits of internal controls as portrayed by Kamau and Josiah
lack a contextual perspective of public health facilities.

11 | P a g e

2.3 The effect of Risk Assessment on service delivery
Risk assessment refers to the careful assessment of factors that affect the possibility of objectives
of the organization not being achieved. It refers to the identification and analysis of relevant risks
associated with achieving the objectives of the organization (Karagiorgos et al., 2009). They add
that risk assessment is the process of identifying and analyzing management relevant risks to the
preparation of financial statements that would be presented fairly in conformity with general
accepted accounting principle. In organizations, management must determine the level of risk
carefully to be accepted, and try to maintain such risk within determined levels. It is therefore the
management’s responsibility to design internal controls to ensure efficiency and effectiveness,
reliability of financial reporting as well as compliance with laws and regulations. This is ensured
by periodic performance review and evaluation of the adequacy and effectiveness of the controls
designed by the internal auditor department.

Investigation was carried out on the effect of internal control systems on the performance of
commercial banks in Nigeria Umar, D. et al (2018). A survey method was employed and the
study used stratified random sampling, in which a total of 382 were chosen. They collected data
using questionnaire method and data was analyzed using Statistical Package for the Social
Sciences (SPSS) version 23. The findings of the study revealed a positive and significant
relationship between risk assessment and bank performance.

Mwazo et al (2017) conducted a study on the role of internal control system on service delivery
in the National Treasury of Taita- Taveta County in Kenya. The study adopted a descriptive
research design. The population of the study comprised 255 respondents, out of which a
sample of 144 respondents was selected using stratified random sampling.
They collected data using the questionnaire method and analysis was performed using SPSS 21.
The results of the multiple regression analysis revealed a positive relationship between risk
management system and service delivery. Much as the results of this study are beneficial to the
current research, the researcher will employ a case study design where both quantitative and
qualitative approaches will be applied.

12 | P a g e

The relationship between internal control system and education service delivery in Busia
Municipal Council was examined by Banura W. (2018), a case study design was adopted, and a
population sample of 138 respondents were used, a questionnaire, interview guide and
documents review methods were adopted for data collection. Data was analyzed using
descriptive statistics of mean and standard deviation, correlation and regression analysis. The
study revealed a high positive significant relationship between risk assessment and education

As stated by Menon and Williams (2010) this internal control element underlines the role of
administration prudently recognizing and examining aspects that could prevent it from goals
attainment. Risk assessment is the recognition and investigation of their related risks to
attainment of the goals, forming a ground for the manner in which risks ought to be controlled.
As economic, market, monitoring and operational situations will keep on changing, ways are
necessary to recognize and tackle the distinctive risks linked with transformation (Crerar, 2007).
It is similarly organized procedure for incorporating specialized decision regarding likely hostile
situations and happenings, and evaluating the possibility of likely financial and non-financial
damages attributed to their happening (Morris, 2011). The second internal control guideline
focuses on risk evaluation. Internal control ought to offer for the risk evaluation the organization
encounters from internal as well as external origins. After risks have been recognized, they must
be inspected for their likely weight.

While there is little research on risk assessment on service delivery in private institutions
(Rehman, Ramzan, Hwang, & Kim, 2021), attempt to relate the two concepts. The authors used
risk assessment to mediate the relation between corporate governance and service delivery. The
results indicate that risk assessment partially predicts performance in goal oriented firms.
Mormul (2021) investigated risk assessment control in Poland and found low understanding of
risk management among employees. The study identified the need for training employees on
management control systems. This study focused on control systems in local government and
ignored performance. Besides, the findings in Poland may not be transferable to Kabale. From a
public sector context, (Eleftheriadis & Vyttas, 2018) examined measurement of risk and
performance of public organizations. The study found a significant relation between risk

13 | P a g e

assessments on service delivery. The effect was mostly influenced by economic risk. This study
was based on public sector in Greece. From Kenya, (Ahmed & Ng’angas, 2019) show that risk
assessment is a significant predictor of performance of County governments. The predictive
influence is mostly observed in risk identification.

14 | P a g e

2.4 The effect of Control Activities on Service Delivery
Control activities refer to policies, procedures, and mechanisms put in place to ensure directives
of the management are properly carried out (Aikins, 2011; Rezaee et al., 2001). Appropriate and
accurate documentation of policies and procedural guidelines helps to determine how the control
activities are to be executed. It also provides adequate information for auditors’ examination of
the overall adequacy of control design over financial management practices (Aikins, 2011).
These control activities ensure that all necessary actions should be taken with the aim to address
risks so that organizational objectives are achieves. According to Rezaee et al. (2001), internal
control activities occur throughout the organization. They include a range of activities like;
approvals, authorizations, verifications, reconciliations, reviews of operating performance,
security of asset and segregation of duties. Most of them are made possible through the help of
the internal audit function.
Furthermore, an investigation by Umar, D. et al (2018) portrayed the effect of internal control
systems on the performance of commercial banks in Nigeria. A survey design was employed 382
respondents were selected using stratified random sampling. Questionnaire method was
administered for data collection. Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS) version 23
was used for data analysis. The findings of the study revealed that control activities have a
positive and significant relationship.

Kayondo, B. (2018) examined a study of Internal Control System and Service Delivery in the
Health Service Sector of Uganda a Case of Masaka District Local Government. The study
adopted a case study design and had a study population of 202 and a sample size of 133 which
was derived from the Krejcie and Morgan sampling table (1970). Stratified random and
purposive sampling methods were used by the researcher in data collection. The empirical data
was analyzed both quantitatively and qualitatively to examine the relationship between internal
controls and health service delivery. The key findings of the study indicated control activities
have a positive and significant effect on health service delivery.

Banura, W. (2018) examined the relationship between internal control system and education
service delivery in Busia Municipal Council a case study design was used. A study population
of 138 was adopted. Questionnaire, interview guide and documents review were used for data

15 | P a g e

collection, data was analyzed using descriptive statistics of mean and standard deviation,
correlation and regression analysis. The study revealed a high positive significant relationship
between risk assessment and education service delivery.

Control activities are another component of internal controls Whittington and Pany (2016), they
found out that control activities are policies and procedures that help ensure that management
directives are carried out. Controls activities in an organization basically comprise of
performance reviews which involves comparing actual performance with budgets, forecasts, and
prior period performances. Information processing: (necessary to check accuracy, completeness
and authorization of transactions). Physical controls: (necessary to provide security over both
records and other assets) and segregation of duties: (where no one person should handle all
aspects of a transaction from the beginning to the end).

In private sector organizations, approvals and authorizations help in detecting potential areas of
fraud and prevent them accordingly since many officers are involved in the transaction process
from initiation to completion (Dickens, 2016). By so doing, the organization streamlines
transactions and enforces accountability (BCBS, 2010). One of the control activities is
segregating duties. According to Russell (2009), segregation of duties requires that one person in
the organization is in charge of transactions, making sure that the transaction is complete. In
large organizations, duties are spread across individuals and departments to reduce the level of
funds misappropriations (Etuk, 2011). In another usage, segregation of duties reduces role
ambiguity in the sense that different roles are assigned to different individuals and offices during
the transaction process Kamau (2014). The entire essence of segregation of duties is to monitor
the accounting process and check for any chances of occurrence of error. In the long run, the
organization is capable of avoiding error at whatsoever cost, which makes all employees get
involved in reducing errors and mistakes.

16 | P a g e

2.5 Summary of Literature Review
This chapter reviewed existing studies on internal control components of control environment,
risk assessment, monitoring and its outcomes generally in the goal oriented firms and specifically
on service delivery. The literature also points out significant challenges in implementing internal
control, a problem which limits the effectiveness of internal controls in achieving their
objectives. In conclusion, it can be observed that the review of existing literature reveals an
increasing interest in examining the internal control environment and this portrays a positive
relationship to service delivery.

17 | P a g e

CHAPTER THREE

RESEARCH METHODOLOGY

3.1 Introduction
This chapter explores the approaches the study used to gain information on the research and they
included, the research design, area of the study, study population, sample size and sampling
techniques, data collection procedures, data collection methods, data collection instruments,
quality control, data management and processing, data analysis, ethical consideration and
limitations of the study.

3.2 Research Design
This study adopted a descriptive cross-sectional study design with a quantitative method to carry
out an investigation on the relationship between internal controls and service delivery in Source
of the Nile Hotel Jinja. According to Saunders et al (2014) cross-sectional study design is carried
out once and therefore represents a snap shot of one point in time.

3.3 Study population
The researcher obtained information from the case study. The researcher then involved all these
categories in the study because she assumed as if they had all the study information. The total
number of the study population was (90) people at the Hotel.
The study population therefore included that respondents from different departments at the
Company including; head of departments, Supervisors, Housekeeping, Security guards, Catering
and service department that have been selected during the study process in the study area.

3.4 Sample size
A sample size of 74 respondents was selected from the study area using statistical tables of
Yamen’s formula (1967). The sampling approach is as shown in table 1 below.

18 | P a g e

Table 1.1: Showing category of respondents as well as the Sample size
Category of respondents
Study
population
Sample size
Sampling Technique
Head of departments
Housekeeping
Simple random Sampling
Catering department
Simple random Sampling
Supervisors
Receptionists
Security department
Total

Primary source, 2023

The study used a sample size of 74 respondents because as it is large enough compared to the
study population of Source of the Nile Hotel
A sample of 90 respondents from a population of 74 was selected randomly using Yamane’s
formula (1967)
Sample size (n) =
N
1+Ne2
Where,
n= Expected sample size
N= Target population
e= The error in the estimation, normally computed at 95% confidence
n=
1+90(0.05)2 = 74

19 | P a g e

3.5 Sampling techniques and procedures
The study used purposive sampling during the process of data collection from the study
respondents. The study used purposive sampling technique since it was to enable the researcher
to select a sample with experience and knowledge about the study variables and this method was
used to select all the study respondents.

3.6 Data sources

Concerning data sources, both primary and secondary data were used as the main sources of data
used in the study.

3.6.1 Primary data
Primary data involved use of a questionnaire guide method. During the collection of this data,
the researcher had to approach the study area with the research tools as she got responses as per
the study respondents. Such data was used to analyze the problem that was at hand.

3.6.2 Secondary data
The researcher collected secondary data from different sources like; text books, internet,
newspaper, magazines, and journals that were found at Source of the Nile Hotel. This
information was reviewed by visiting places like libraries and internet cafes and this type of
information was used to supplement collected data from different categories of the respondents
during data collection.

3.7 Data collection and instruments
3.7.1 Questionnaire
The questionnaire tool was close ended in nature and was self-administered where the researcher
had to fill the questionnaire in the study field as per respondents’ responses. The tool was used to
collect information from the employees and customers. The questionnaire method of data
collection was used because of being cheap and that the method could enable the research collect
responses with minimum errors and a high level of confidentiality.

20 | P a g e

3.8 Study Variables and their measurements
The study constituted of two variables as; Internal Control Systems as an independent variable
while service delivery of private sector organizations as a dependent variable. Internal control
systems were measured by the internal controls used that included; preventative controls,
detective controls, corrective controls, control environment, risk assessment, control activities,
information and communication as well as monitoring. However, during the study, performance
was commonly measured by the amount of revenue collection, service delivery, expenditure
performance, value for money among other measures that were thought of during the process of
undertaking the study.

3.9 Data analysis
Editing of collected data was done to make the data ready and simpler for presentation. The
filled questionnaires were edited one by one to correct errors that were done by the study
respondents. Data was edited in order to check for accuracy, completeness, consistency and
uniformity and presentation of data involved use of tables which were generated from the
questions that were relevant to the study variables.
The edited data was then analyzed quantitatively. Quantitative data was grouped and statistical
descriptions such as tables showing frequencies and percentages for better interpretation.
However, qualitative data were analyzed in a way of identifying the responses from respondents
that was relevant to the research problem and such data was analyzed by explaining the facts
collected from the field under which the researcher was able to quote respondents’ responses.

3.10 Ethical consideration
The researcher had to respect human dignity by not revealing the identity of the respondents in
the study. Under here, letters of introduction were got from the supervisor seeking for permission
to conduct the study after being directed by the supervisor to do so. These letters were presented
to the respondents in the study area for permission to conduct the study. Once the permission
was granted, the researcher was able to distribute the questionnaires to the respondents in
addition to interviewing them and the next stage after was analyzing the data collected from the
study respondents.

21 | P a g e

3.11 Limitations of the study
The study was limited by finances as it was not enough to cater for secretarial services. The
researcher however got some financial support from the sponsors or relatives that supported her
during the research study.

22 | P a g e

CHAPTER FOUR
PRESENTATIONS, ANALYSIS AND INTERPRETATION OF FINDINGS

4.1 Findings of the study
This chapter presents the study findings on Internal Control System and service delivery in
Source of the Nile Hotel. The first section presented response rate, this is followed by
background information about the respondents and finally descriptive and inferential
presentation and analysis of the study findings in relation to specific objectives.

4.1.1 Response rate
The response rate for this research was 90% which was high. Amin (2005) suggested that a high
response rate also suggests more accurate survey results.
Table 4.2: Response Rate
Category
Questionnaires
issued
Questionnaires returned
Response rate
(%)
Manager
Head of departments
Supervisor
Cooks and food servers