 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Wasswa Katono Isaac 
 
28 
 
CONSTRAINTS TO UGANDAN SME’s PARTICIPATION IN AGOA 
 
 
Wasswa Katono Isaac*
Many countries in Africa realize that an outward-oriented development strategy (as 
opposed to protectionism) is the best way to attain economic growth and fight poverty. 
Exported growth is anchored on the premise that trade is important for Africa’s 
development, and recognizes the importance of streamlining trade into overall National 
 
ABSTRACT 
Many Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) in Uganda have not utilized the opportunities 
presented by AGOA. The objective of this study was to examine the constraints that hinder these 
firms from utilizing these opportunities. Specifically the study examined the macro constraints 
facing these firms, with a view to finding solutions to them. A literature review was carried out   
to identify challenges to SME’s participation in AGOA. , followed by a triangulation technique in 
which a qualitative study (Focus Discussion Group) involving key stakeholders in this business 
was done to further identity these constraints and their underlying dimensions. Instrument 
development was   next, followed by a reliability analysis in which the psychometric properties of 
the instrument were assessed on the basis of   Cronbach’s alpha.   A quantitative study was then 
done by administering the refined questionnaire to a group of exporters.  Factor Analysis by 
promax (oblimin ) rotation revealed six oblique factors identifying that the most important 
constraints facing Ugandan SMEs are Lack of middle managers, infrastructure,  technology,  
marketing , inadequate  export credit  and governance issues.  The study   calls for   
technological transfer from the developed countries to the Less Developed Countries (LDCs) in 
addition to addressing the other barriers.  There is also a need for exporters to  develop   better  
marketing skills through training .The study   implores the  government to put policies in place  
that will enhance the development of  SMEs.      
 
Comment 
 
Key Words: Exports, Constraints, AGOA, Preferences, Small and Medium Enterprises. 
INTRODUCTION 
                                                 
Business Management Review 11(2) pp 28-53 ISSN 0856-2253©July-December 2007 FCM. All rights of 
reproduction in any form reserved. 
* Waswa Katono Isaac: Faculty of Business and Administration,  Uganda Christian University 
ikatono@ucu.ac.ug 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Business Management Review Journal Vol.11(2) 
 
 
29 
 
Development plans.  Trade increases income through resource reallocation, and since 
many African countries have relatively large informal sectors, their economies should 
grow faster to the extent that their exports expand rapidly and become diversified 
(World Bank et al.,2000).  To assist developing countries boost their export trade, non-
reciprocal trade preferences have long been granted to them by the developed world, 
the pattern of which reflected past colonial ties in some cases. In 1968, the creation of a 
Generalized System of Preferences (GSP) was recommended by UNCTAD on the basis 
of non-reciprocity since it was realized that treating unequal countries equally simply 
entrenched inequalities (UNCTAD, 2004). 
 
Consequently, the European Union through the Lome convention and the Cotonou 
agreement has extended preferences to African Caribbean and Pacific states (ACP). 
Likewise, the USA has extended most-favoured nation status (MFN) to many countries 
in Africa through the African Growth Opportunity Act (AGOA) which came into force 
on 18th
 
 May 2000.    AGOA was intended to benefit small and medium sized 
enterprises (SMEs) as well as large businesses and state-owned firms (Corey, 2006). 
Eligible African countries gained liberal access to the US market and   the list of 
products which they may export to USA, subject to zero import duty under the GSP, 
was expanded.  AGOA applies to more then 6400 items, and as a consequence  98% of 
all US imports from eligible countries were  duty free in 2005 (Corey, 2006). Thus 
AGOA has the potential to change the course of relations between Africa and the USA, 
while helping millions of people in Africa to prosper. 
 However, it is debatable whether trade preferences have made a substantive impact in 
terms of enhancing the welfare of recipient countries (Francois  et al., 2005).  
Developing countries in Asia that were granted the fewest preferences at their inception 
in the 1960’s have  grown faster, yet those that were granted the most preferences  
(including Sub Saharan Africa) have failed to increase their per capita incomes or to 
diversity their exports significantly.   In the last 20 years, SSA has recorded the poorest 
economic performance, has not fully exploited the benefits of globalization and seems 
to have gained little from trade preferences (Kasekende et al., 2002).  Therefore such 
arrangements are not a guaranteed means of achieving the objectives of African export 
expansion and diversification (Oyejide, 2005).  While stimulating export diversification 
in a few countries, AGOA has fallen short of the potential impetus that preferences 
could otherwise offer African countries (Brenton and Hoppe, 2004). The expansion of 
USA-Africa trade is largely due to oil imports from West Africa. Total non-oil trade 
under AGOA actually declined by 16 % (Corey, 2006). In 2004, the majority of AGOA 
eligible countries utilized only up to 2% of the value of trade preferences (Brenton and 
Hope, 2004   ). It is now a fact that AGOA’s goal of promoting multi-sector economic 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Wasswa Katono Isaac 
 
30 
 
growth in Africa has just been partially met, and much remains to be done to promote 
Africa’s entrepreneurs and enhance the capacity of their  SMEs   (Corey, 2006). 
The world over,  SMEs face immense challenges that limit their capacity to grow and 
exploit opportunities, with particularly smaller and younger firms being more 
vulnerable to export constraints (Katsikeas and Morgan,1994).Compared with 
entrepreneurship, internationalization and small business management, there has been 
less work done on the experiences of SMEs as they grow internationally. Further, the 
overwhelming majority of studies examining export barriers facing SMEs have been 
done in the USA and Europe, which ports limits the generalizabilty of their findings. 
Research dealing with export barriers faced by firms in developing countries has been 
limited (Leonidou, 2004).  Studies that have been done on SME exports of developing 
countries have established that    their inability to break through to the export market in 
spite of the preferences is attributed to numerous obstacles that adversely affect their 
performance and there have been many attempts to cluster these constraints. For 
example, Beyene (2002) based on empirical data, Tesform and Lutz (2006) through a 
literature search, Shacfer (2001) as well as Neupert et al (2006) through qualitative 
methodology attempt to classify the constraints.  However, many others studies e.g. 
Todd and Javalgi (2007), Gumede and Rasmussen (2002), make no attempt to classify 
the export barriers, let alone rank them in order of importance. An important missing 
link in the literature is that most studies do not rank the constraints (and by implication 
the interventions) in order of importance yet empirical evidence from the Economic 
Commission For Africa (ECA) shows that policy intervention is required at all levels to 
help African SMEs overcome these barriers and prioritizing such interventions is the 
first step in this direction (Beyene, 2002).  This paper intends to address this gap 
through a survey in response to a call from Tesfom and Lutz (2006), who observe that 
the number of articles addressing export problems of manufacturing firms from 
developing countries has been declining since 1985-1989 and that the trend in the 
articles has changed from problem identification (theory building) to testing the effects 
of export problems. To cover this gap,  they call upon  researchers  to redirect their 
future research to barriers encountered by exporters from developing countries and 
recommend further analysis of export obstacles identified in their study through the 
development of a questionnaire for a regional survey of SMEs from developing 
countries.  They specifically suggest: “Each obstacle could be posed to respondents as 
a potential barrier to exporting… their responses could be along a likert scale (5 or 7 
points) from “not an obstacle” to “major obstacle”.  Responses could be factor 
analyzed to see if the statistical results match the hypothesized clusters, or whether 
some new underlying factors emerge from the survey.”  
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Business Management Review Journal Vol.11(2) 
 
 
31 
 
 Uganda   utilized less than 5% of the AGOA preferences in 2004 (Brenton and Hoppe, 
2004) and hence the benefits from AGOA are limited (Uganda Export Promotion 
Board, 2005).  Given that trade matters have only recently been streamlined in the 
National Development Plan (Mutahunga, 2006), the purpose of this study is to identify, 
cluster and rank the constraints facing Ugandan SMEs in regard to AGOA. 
Specifically, the study will have the following objectives: 
 
• 
What factors mostly constrain Ugandan SMEs participation in AGOA? 
• 
What are the underlying dimensions of these factors? 
• 
To what extent are Ugandan SMEs satisfied with the way the government has 
handled these constraints? 
 
 It is hoped that the findings from this study will help in further streamlining 
government trade policy and export strategy, so as to further position the country 
competitively. The rest of the article is structured as follows. The next section is a 
synthesis of the extant literature, followed by the methodology that was used to carry 
out the study. The findings of the study are given thereafter, together with a discussion 
of their implications. A conclusion sums up the paper. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
Definition   and Importance of SMEs 
There is no universally accepted definition of SMEs in Africa (Beyene, 2000).Even 
definitions of other countries lack uniformity, and reflect the relative development of 
the respective economies. For example, in the USA, small businesses are those with 
less than 500 employees, which figure may represent medium to large enterprises in the 
African context. In India, a small or medium enterprise is an undertaking in which 
investment in fixed assets in plant and machinery (owned or leased) does not exceed 
$23 million (Todd and Javalgi, 2007). On the other hand, SMEs are defined as those 
business organizations with less than 100 employees (Macqueen, 2004). Specifically, 
small businesses are defined as those that employ 20 people, and medium businesses 
are those that employ 20 or more, but not more than 200 (Freeman and Lawley, 2005). 
This paper adopts the latter definition.  
 
SMEs often account for the majority of firms and a substantial proportion of 
employment in both developed and developing  states ( Liedholm and Mead, 1987; 
OECD, 2000; Hallberg, 2001).Were it not for the ability of SMEs to create jobs, the 
majority of Africans would be unemployed (Corey, 2006).  SME are important in that 
they operate even in the poorest communities which warrants them appropriate support 
irrespective of any other advantages or disadvantages (Haggblade  et al., 2002). SMEs 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Wasswa Katono Isaac 
 
32 
 
do not operate in a vacuum hence their activities and impact are influenced by the 
context in which they operate. There is a broad range of policy environments and 
business strategies that have a wide spectrum of impacts on them. For instance, market 
failures disproportionately affect them. Such inequity warrants support (Biggs, 2002; 
Beck et al., 2003). There are strong links between the debates on SMEs versus large-
scale firms, and the debates on localization versus globalization of trade.  SMEs might 
be in favour of localization and large firms might favour international trade (Macqueen, 
2004).In spite of such skeptical debates, there have been many attempts to enhance the 
export capacity of African SMEs, because the challenges faced by firms in developing 
economies compared with developed economies most likely lead to different 
implications for managers and policy makers in these contexts (Neupert et al., 2006). 
 
International Trade Theory and SMEs in International Trade  
International trade theory offers an explanation for the pattern of international trade, 
and the distribution of the gains from trade. While many economists agree about the 
benefits of liberal trade, many other people are not persuaded by it arguments. The 
traditional theory of international trade is based on the classical labour cost theory and 
the neo- classical factor endowment theory (Todaro, 1995). The former emphasizes 
differences among nations (Risse 2005, in Hoskyns 2006) through the principle of 
comparative advantage, arguing that nations should specialize in the export of those 
products which they can produce at the lowest relative cost.  The latter proposes that 
different products require productive factors in different relative proportions, and that 
countries have different endowments of factors of production. These theories imply 
that free international trade would benefit all the nations of the world as well as 
maximize global output.  Todaro however points out that the restrictive and unreal 
assumptions on which these theories are based lead to faulty conclusions about the 
structure of world trade and the distribution of its benefits, since these assumptions are 
in many ways contrary to the reality in international economic relations between 
nations.  Stiglitz and Charlton (2005) concur and further explain that conventional trade 
theory is flawed because it assumes full employment and no restrictions on resources. 
This is not the case for many developing countries that suffer from high levels of 
unemployment and limited resources which constrain the gains that can be expected 
from trade.   In summary, factor endowments and comparative costs are dynamic, and 
often determine the nature and character of international specialization (Todaro 
1995:338). This means that any initial state of unequal resource endowments (e.g. 
technology and capital) will tend to be reinforced and exacerbated by trade, reinforcing 
already unequal trading relationships and distributing the benefits in favour of those 
who already have, thus perpetuating the physical and human underdevelopment that 
characterizes many developing countries.  In spite of all this, developing countries are 
aware that self-reliance and isolation is not the solution. Todaro suggests a two-

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Business Management Review Journal Vol.11(2) 
 
 
33 
 
pronged approach: negotiate with the first world for removal of tariff and non-tariff 
barriers, as well as utilize their scarce resources efficiently. The first suggestion has 
resulted in trade preferences which the developing countries have failed to utilize. The 
latter recommendation has proved difficult to implement because of many policy-
related and other constraints within the micro and macro environment of firms in SSA. 
The next section scrutinizes the debate on policy-related constraints. 
  
Institutional Weaknesses and Protectionism  
 In a very competitive environment, as is the case under globalization, there is 
increased competition which results in a reduction in the ability of SMEs to control 
their development paths (Etmad  et al., (2001) in Todd and Javalgi, 2007). In such a 
situation, there is a need to identify and understand factors that have an impact on 
international performance (Kuivalainen et al., (2004) in Todd and Javalgi 2007). This 
section examines why export performance by many developing countries has been 
bleak. 
 
 First, some researchers argue that foreign protectionism is not responsible for the poor 
trade and economic performance in SSA (Ng and Yeats in Tupy, 2005). Proponents of 
this view urge that, while it is true that preferential trade agreements at times include 
restrictions against LDC exports, e.g. phytosanitary regulations and administrative 
costs which combine to raise the cost of production in these countries (the ban on fish 
exports from East Africa to Europe in 2005 is an example), domestic conditions in SSA 
are more responsible for the problem. Of particular importance in this regard are 
factors like political instability, e.g. the war in Northern Uganda that has taken close to 
20 years (Ohtswamah, 2008), plus other governance issues like lack of the rule of law 
and corruption (Zachary ,2008). Second, the dismal performance of SSA in 
international trade is explained in terms of trade openness. The argument is that trade 
liberalization enables more efficient allocation of resources to productive uses, and 
countries with an abundant supply of unskilled labour and low labour costs can expand 
production and employment in labour intensive industries (Bigman, 2002). In spite of 
this,  and despite substantial declines in applied and bound tariffs, protectionism is very 
much alive and SSA is more guilty of the offence since its average   tariffs are more 
than  three times higher than developed country tariffs, making it one of the world’s 
most protectionist regions (Tupy ,2005 ). He espouses that SSA leaders view imports as 
a threat, pay lip service to liberalization and call for greater access to global markets, 
while rejecting trade openness in their countries. They do not appreciate the positive 
impact of foreign competition on stimulating domestic production (e.g. the rise in 
economic growth of India and South East Asia is partly attributed to an increase in 
productivity as a result of trade liberalization) and do not realize that the import 
substitution model was dismantled because it rewarded inefficiency, undermined 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Wasswa Katono Isaac 
 
34 
 
competitiveness, bred corruption, penalized consumers, discouraged technological 
transfer, etc. In short, lack of trade openness has bred incompetence and lack of 
competitiveness, thus pushing developing world products out of developed world 
markets. 
 
The above arguments are of course challenged by many workers and international 
bodies who underscore the failed experience of many countries in SSA (Bigman, 
2002). For example, Oxfam (a Non-Government Organization) argues for more trade 
reforms in developed markets, while rejecting similar policies in the developing world 
(Tupy, 2005). Particular  emphasis is put on trade distortions brought about by 
subsidies to farmers in first-world countries which continue to account for the drop in 
prices of many such subsidized products, making SSA  unable to compete.   Stiglitz 
and Charlton (2005) call for caution, pointing out that more successful developing 
economies like the Asian countries have pursued trade liberalization selectively, 
slowing it down where necessary and introducing complementary policies.  Further, 
since the assumption of full employment in trade theories violates the reality of 
unemployment and underemployment in many developing countries, they may be 
justified in pursuing protectionist strategies in order to ensure sufficient job 
opportunities and also absorb surplus labour in their economies (Todaro, 1995). 
 
SMEs  Constraints to Export trade 
Apart from the issues of protectionism and liberalization discussed above, many 
researchers agree that the rapid and sustained growth in Asia and the deficiency of this   
in a large part of Africa reflects weaknesses in domestic policy and institutions, and 
that the major constraints facing African export diversification and expansion are 
supply-side constraints (Francois et al., 2005).They argue that domestic reforms are 
urgently required if economic growth in SSA is to become a reality. Since 
entrepreneurship and economic growth are related (Beyene, 2002; Gupta et al., 2004 in 
Todd and Javalgi, 2007),  African countries must realize that, to promote growth, they 
should provide a conducive macro- economic environment in which the private sector 
can flourish.  Such an environment continues to elude many of them because of the 
numerous constraints within their economies.  There have been many attempts by 
various scholars to classify the export barriers faced by  SMEs in their path to 
internationalization. Tesar and Trelton (1982) in Neupert et al., (2006) divide them into 
start–up constraints (e.g. start-up costs, identifying opportunities) and ongoing export 
problems (e.g. standards and different consumer tastes). Beyene (2002), drawing on 
empirical studies by the ECA, categorized them into policy and regulatory factors, 
infrastructure, access to finance, lack of non financial support services, and lack of 
support services for marketing, while Leonidou (2004) , as well as Tesform and Lutz 
(2006), through a literature search, classify them into internal and external barriers. The 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Business Management Review Journal Vol.11(2) 
 
 
35 
 
internal factors (micro environment) are those that apply to individual firms and are 
usually associated with inadequate resources for exporting.  They are subdivided into 
company capabilities (Katsikeas and Morgan, 1994) and product characteristics (Keng 
and Jiun (1989) in Tesfom and Lutz, 2006). The external forces are those that are not 
under the control of the individual firms or industry e.g. industry factors, export market 
issues and macro-economic factors. Scharf et al., (2001) in Neupert et al., (2006), using 
qualitative methodology through the critical incident technique, classify these barriers 
into those relating to initiating export business or ongoing export operations. The table 
below is an attempt to summarize these constraints. 
 
 Table 1:       Export   Constraints Facing African   SMEs 
 
 
Besides constraint number 6 (firm level), the table shows the key external forces that 
hinder SSA SMEs in their quest to enter international markets.  Empirical studies by 
 
Constraint  
Description of constraint 
Major source  
1 
Competition    
Main competitive strength being in economic 
sectors where international competition is 
intense.  
World Bank, 2000 ; 
Oyejide, 2005. 
2 
Industrial 
sophistication 
and technology 
Shifting technology plus obsolete technology. 
World Bank, 2000. 
 
3 
Infrastructure 
development  
 Poor 
infrastructure 
(telecommunication, 
power, transport, water, sanitation and finance)   
World Bank, 2000. 
Beyene 2002 
4 
Policy matters   
-  Inadequate compensation for exporters 
 -   Inadequate   integration of trade policy in 
national    development plans. 
- 
hostile 
domestic 
policy, 
regulatory 
framework. 
World Bank, 2000; 
Tupy 2005, Francois et al., 
2004., ECA 2001. 
Brenton and Hoppe, 2006. 
5 
Phytosanitary 
measures   
 Complex health, safety and environmental 
standards 
ITC, 
2001; 
Jaffet 
and 
Henson 2004, Tupy 2005 
6 
Firm level  
Production and marketing  know-how, access 
to finance  
 ITC, 2001.,Beyene2002, 
Leonidou 2004.Keng and 
Jiun 1989, Katsikeas and 
Morgan 1994. 
7 
Exports structure   
Major exports and their distribution  
Oyejide 2005; Ng and Yeats 
2004. 
Brenton and Hoppe 2006 
8 
Erosion of trade 
preferences.  
 
Francois et al., 2005 
Low et al 2005  
9 
Rules of origin   
Differences in applicability  
Brenton and Kenzuki 2004 
Brenton and Hoppe 2006 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Wasswa Katono Isaac 
 
36 
 
the ECA (2001) indicate that policy matters and regulatory restrictions,  which include 
issues such as fiscal and monetary policy, regulations that impact the cost of business, 
plus infrastructure, all affect SMEs to a great extent. Other key barriers include 
conditionality phrases in the trade arrangements (tariff and non-tariff barriers) that 
make it hard for SSA to utilize the preferences offered to them by the first world.  In 
fact research by IMF shows that  AGOA stands to yield only 19-26% of the benefits 
that it could have yielded, if it were free and unconditional ( Mattoo et al., 2002 in 
Tupy, 2006). 
 
All these constraints (both internal and external) combine to prevent the SMEs from 
realizing their full potential as instruments of development. They not only constrain 
their growth, but they also push up their transaction costs thus making their products 
less competitive locally and internationally (Beyene, 2000). The next section discusses 
the impact of some of these constraints on AGOA trade. 
SSA and AGOA   
There have been many attempts to enhance the export capacity of African SMEs since 
the launch of the original AGOA in 2000. Consequently four hubs for global 
competitiveness have been established in Botswana, Ghana, Kenya and Senegal. Even 
then, African SMEs continue to lag behind in their ability to enjoy AGOA benefits 
(Corey, 2006) due to a number of factors.  
 
Firstly, it remains a fact that, for certain African countries, US preferences are of little 
or no relevance under the current structure of their exports since there are no or just a 
few export products that are eligible for the available preferences (Oyejide, 2005).  For 
exampla many entrepreneurs are part of agriculture and yet many agricultural products 
are not part of AGOA (Corey, 2006). Even then, most of these agricultural exports are 
in the form of primary commodities and yet this structure is unlikely to change in the 
medium to short term (Ng and Yeats, 2000).  Generally, there are many countries in 
Africa for whom the amount of exports eligible for preferential access to the US market 
comprises less then 50% of total exports to the market (see table 2). Only 5 countries 
have over 90% of their trade to the US covered by trade preferences, namely; Lesotho 
100%, Nigeria 98.4%, Cape Verde 97.7%, Gabon 99.4% and Mauritius 94.5% 
(Oyejide, 2005). Secondly, increased competition in the market for products which 
benefit from the preferences may inflict losses on African countries that depend heavily 
on   such products (Oyejide, 2005)  
 
The predicament facing African countries is further worsened by the fact that more 
than 900 tariff lines for manufactured products, e.g. textiles and leather, are not covered 
by AGOA. Also excluded are diary products, soft drinks, cocoa, coffee, tea, tobacco, 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Business Management Review Journal Vol.11(2) 
 
 
37 
 
and nuts. The average tariff on products excluded from AGOA is 30%. As a result, 
African exporters still face substantial tariff escalation (Brenton and Hoppe, 2004). The 
US subsidy scheme for cotton is also undermining export returns from African 
producers. It is often asserted that stimulating the textile sector in African countries is a 
key objective of AGOA, yet textile products from African countries are subjected to 
duties in the US. 
 
 
Table 2: Value of AGOA Preferences in 2004 
 
   
0-2%  
2-5%  
5-10 %  
>10 %  
Angola, 
Burkina 
Faso, 
Benin, 
Cameroon, Djibouti, Chad, Congo, 
DR Congo, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, 
Guinea, 
Guinea-Bissau, 
Mali, 
Mauritania, Niger, Nigeria, Rwanda, 
Sao Tome, Senegal, Seychelles, 
Sierra Leone, South Africa, Zambia  
Ethiopia, 
Tanzania, 
Uganda  
Botswana, 
Mozambique, 
Namibia  
Cape 
Verde, 
Kenya, 
Lesotho, 
Madagascar, 
Malawi, 
Mauritius, 
Swaziland  
  Source: Brenton and Hoppe 2004. 
 
 In Table 2 above, Brenton and Hoppe (2004) show that for the majority of African 
beneficiaries, the value of preferences is very small or negligible. For 24 of the then 37 
beneficiaries the value of preferences was less than 2 per cent of the value of exports to 
the US in 2004. For only 7 countries did the value of preferences exceed 10 percent of 
the value of exports to the USA. 
 
Uganda in the AGOA Market 
Specifically for Uganda, besides most of the above constraints that apply to most of 
sub-Saharan Africa, the ECA survey (2000) established that the regulatory and policy 
environment, poor infrastructure in terms of power (availability and cost) as well as 
access to finance were  key constraints hindering the growth of SMEs. Besides these, 
the African Competitiveness Report (2005)  points out weakness and lack of 
transparency in tax administration, commercial injustice, cumbersome customs 
procedures, labour constraints (lack of middle managers), lack of access to market 
information and  a poor entrepreneurial culture as key constraints affecting  Ugandan 
SMEs. Further, UEPB (2005) also adds that little is known about the American market 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Wasswa Katono Isaac 
 
38 
 
in terms of consumer behaviour and trade practices and continues to point out that 
inadequate product volumes and the long and arduous certification process are major 
constraints hindering exports to the USA under AGOA. To this list, Kwesiga (2001) 
adds the lack of foreign domestic investment, lack of export processing zones, and the 
inability of Ugandan businessmen to think globally .These constraints combined make 
the performance of Ugandan SMEs in the export market very bleak compared with 
other countries like neighbouring Kenya . However in the case of AGOA (a new 
market), the situation is worse compared with the European Union for example. 
Ugandan exports to the USA are limited, yet both regions offer the country preferences 
as indicated in the table below: 
 
 
Table 3: Ugandan Exports by Region and Country of Destination (000US$) 2001 -
2005. 
 
2001 
2002 
2003 
2004 
2005 
United Kingdom 
28,806 
30,015 
33,883 
29,438 
26,831 
Germany, Federal Republic 
12,134 
13,399 
12,024 
17,677 
33,768 
Belgium 
16,085 
21,902 
12,899 
26,685 
33,147 
Netherlands 
52,803 
56,000 
48,955 
57,860 
85,413 
France  
4,057 
6,844 
5,116 
22,702 
39,581 
Spain  
7,961 
17,732 
14,526 
13,914 
17,988 
Other  
6,393 
10,495 
13,127 
13,481 
15,979 
United States 
6,743 
9,190 
12,693 
15,714 
15,892 
Canada  
943 
832 
1,765 
3,064 
2,094 
Other  
661 
526 
177 
407 
355 
 Source: Uganda Exports Promotion Board (2005) 
 
 This table indicates that Uganda is yet to fully realize the benefits of AGOA.  Total 
Ugandan   exports to the European Union (Lome and Cotonou preferences) are far 
higher than those to the USA (AGOA preferences) in the period 2001-2005. Total 
exports  to the USA  more than doubled in this period  but are far less than those of 
individual countries except France (but only for the first 3 years). All this is in spite of 
the fact that the Ugandan Head of state was the first African President to embrace 
AGOA, and jointly with the US, Uganda sponsored a seminar in 2002 with the theme 
‘Maximizing Benefits of AGOA” in East Africa (Kwesiga, 2002). 
 
Such concerns point to the need for a study with an adapted questionnaire suitable for 
the Uganda export sector and cultural environment. The battery of items in the 
questionnaire should enable ranking of the importance of the constraints as well as 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Business Management Review Journal Vol.11(2) 
 
 
39 
 
gauge the respondents’ overall satisfaction with the way the government has handled 
these constraints. The next section presents the methodology used in the construction of 
the questionnaire, subsequent data collection and analysis. 
METHODODOLOGY 
This section gives an account of the methodology that was used to fulfil the objectives 
of the study. In order to fulfil the first two objectives, the suggestion by Tesfom and 
Lutz (2006)    was adopted, i.e.  the export constraints facing SMEs are factor analyzed 
so as to rank them and also examine their underlying dimensions. The third objective of 
the study was fulfilled through gauging the perceptions of SMEs about the way the 
government has handled the constraints. The procedure below was followed: 
 
Sample and sampling method 
The study sample consisted of 2 apparel firms, 80 exporters of art crafts (middle men) 
18 exporters of agricultural products, 2 officials from the Ministry of Trade and 
Industry, 2 from the AGOA country office and 2 officers from the Uganda Export 
Promotion Board. However, only 100 usable questionnaires were collected in all. This 
sample size is adequate according to Barret and Kline (in Kline 2000), who established 
in a study that in factor analysis, the main factors remained clear and unequivocal until 
the sample dropped below 100. Exporters were identified through the AGOA country 
office, and the snow balling technique.  The snow-balling technique is a sampling 
method in which a researcher selects several people from a sampling framework for 
interview and these people assist the researcher in identifying others to interview 
(Coolican, 2004: 40).  Snowballing was used because   the AGOA country office is yet 
to establish a directory of exporters.  Therefore, respondents were asked to identify 
who else is engaged in this business while government officials were   purposively 
chosen. 
 
Variable construction and validity test 
First a review of the extant literature was done to identify the constraints currently 
facing Ugandan exports to the USA under AGOA. This was followed by a qualitative 
study (Focus Group Discussion) that involved four people who are conversant with 
business to the AGOA market, plus conversations with knowledgeable academicians in 
both international marketing and international trade. This whole effort yielded a total of 
45 likely items for inclusion in the draft questionnaire. 
In order to establish the face/content validity of these items, they were subjected to a 
review by two experts, one from UPTOP (Uganda Programme for Trade Opportunities) 
and another from   the AGOA country office. They also examined these items for 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Wasswa Katono Isaac 
 
40 
 
relevance, ambiguity and repetitions. This exercise ended up with in 14 items being 
dropped, leaving only 31 which were then included in the final questionnaire; these 
items were randomized to avoid any cluster effects.  The scale in the questionnaire   
was anchored from ‘1’ not at all, to ‘7’ extremely large extent. Respondents were 
requested to rate the extent to which each of the items (constraints) affects exports to 
the AGOA market. A pretest was carried out using 5 exporters, all of whom found no 
difficulty in answering the questions. Pre-testing provides a statistical basis to shorten 
long survey instruments without sacrificing their explanatory power since respondents 
may perceive long instruments as cumbersome and this may contribute to non-response 
(Siekpe, 2005: 38). 
 
The psychometric properties of the instrument were assessed using SPSS   by 
examining Cronbach’s alpha (α).  All items had alpha above 0.7 cut-off recommended 
by Nunnally (1978) and overall α for the whole instrument was 0.8927, which is well 
within the range recommended by Nunnally and Bernstein (1994). This shows that the 
measure   was robust. Following Greenland et al., (2005) factor analysis was then 
carried out by first constructing a Pearsonian correlation matrix between each pair of 
the 31 items. Bartlett’s test of sphericity was  done to test the null hypothesis that the 
resultant 31x31 correlation matrix was an identity matrix, all diagonal coefficients are 
equal to one, and off diagonal items are zero (those that are not zero are due to chance). 
The null hypothesis was rejected (χ2 
 
= 1203.421, df=465, p=0.000) meaning that factor 
analysis could proceed. The Kaiser Meyer-Olkin (KMO) test of sampling adequacy 
indicated a coefficient of 0.723, which is interpreted as middling (Kaiser, 1974), further 
reinforcing that factor analysis was appropriate (the closer to 1.0 the better).  Maximum 
likelihood extraction by direct oblimin rotation with Kaiser Normalization yielded   6 
oblique factors each with eigen value greater than one and accounting for 57.8% of the 
variance. A useful factor must account for one unit of variance or have Eigen value >1. 
Oblique factors were preferred because they rotate to simple structure and also agree 
more with psychological theory than do orthogonal factors (Kline, 2005). The factors 
were subsequently named:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Business Management Review Journal Vol.11(2) 
 
 
41 
 
 
 Table 4    : Factors affecting exports to AGOA 
Latent factor 
Item loading at >0.5 
Eigen 
value 
Loading 
AVE 
√AVE 
Α 
Middle 
Managers 
Poor entrepreneurial culture 
 
Lack of middle managers 
7.8 
0.561 
 
0.971 
 
0.63 
0.79 
0.70 
Infrastructure 
High cost of skilled labour 
 
High cost of technology 
 
Poor infrastructure 
2.245 
0.813 
 
0.582 
 
0.783 
0.54 
0.73 
0.7344 
Technology/ 
Product 
innovation 
Inappropriate Technology 
 
Inadequate Product 
innovation 
 
Unfamiliarity with 
American consumer 
behaviour 
 
Inadequate export Insurance 
schemes 
1.1881 
0.836 
 
0.534 
 
0.545 
 
 
0.514 
0.38 
0.62 
0.70 
Marketing 
Limited access to market 
information 
 
Limited knowledge of 
Global best Practices 
 
Poor marketing Skills 
1.740 
0.537 
 
 
0.836 
 
 
0.574 
0.44 
0.66 
0.7114 
Export Credit 
Unfamiliarity with 
American Trade Practices 
 
Inadequate Export credit 
 
Inadequate academic 
Research 
1.539 
0.643 
 
 
0.636 
 
0.591 
0.39 
0.62 
0.701 
Governance 
Issues 
Restrictive Rules of Origin 
 
Governance issues 
1.298 
0.588 
 
0.567 
0.33 
0.58 
0.60 
 
Extraction method: Maximum likelihood estimation 
Rotation method: Oblimin with Kaiser Normalization  
 
The table above shows  the  named  factors / constructs  ( column 1 )  and their 
indicators  ( items)  in column 2, each  with factor loading greater than 0.5. Hair et al., 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Wasswa Katono Isaac 
 
42 
 
2003 (in Barnes 2007) affirm that a measure is loaded significantly on its underlying 
construct if its factor loading exceeds 0.5, which is indicative of nomological validity. 
The table also shows the Average Variance Extracted1
 
 (AVE) of the different factors, 
which is defined as the average variance shared between a construct and its measures 
(Reinartz, Kraft and Hoyer, 2003). A factor should reach 0.5 cut-off recommended by 
Fornell and Lacker (1981) for convergent validity, although only 2 factors achieve this 
level in this study.  However it is not un-common to find measures of an estimated 
model with squared loadings below the 0.5 threshold (Sorebo, Christensen and 
Eikebrokk, 2004) particularly for newly developed items and scales. Hulland (in 
Sorebo  et al., 2004) recommends a suitable cut-off value as 0.16 or 0.25. The table 
also shows that all factors had acceptable reliabilities (0.7 and above) except factor 6 
with a reliability of 0.6. It has been suggested however that Cronbachs alpha should be 
above 0.6 for exploratory research and above 0.70 for confirmatory research and that in 
the case of a scale with two or three items, a coefficient alpha of 0.60 or 0.50 is 
acceptable as a minimum standard (Cortina, 1993).  Loewenthal (2001:60) concurs 
when she argues that if a scale has a small number of items, it may not be possible to 
get a high reliability value and thus a coefficient of 0.6 may be sufficient. Based on 
these arguments, factor 6 was not excluded from subsequent analysis.   Lastly,   since 
the inter-correlation between pairs of the constructs did not exceed 0.9, the problem of 
multicollinearity was ignored (Hair  et al., 1998).   
Next, the discriminant validity of these factors was examined.  Discriminant validity is 
a measure of the extent to which   constructs (latent factors) are distinct, i.e. they 
should not correlate so highly as to seem to be measuring the same underlying 
dimension (Siekpe 2005). Discriminant validity can be assessed by examining the 
factor correlation matrix and AVE. The square root of AVE should exceed the 
correlations in the rows and columns for adequate discriminant validity, which 
indicates that more variance is shared between the construct and its indicators than with 
other constructs (Fornell and Lacker in Siekpe, 2005). This is the case in table 5 below.  
 
Table 5: Factor correlation matrix and discriminant validity of factors 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
Α 
1 
0.790 
 
 
 
 
 
0.70 
2 
0.234 
0.729 
 
 
 
 
0.73 
3 
0.379 
0.251 
0.62 
 
 
 
0.70 
4 
0.199 
0.132 
0.182 
0.66 
 
 
0.71 
5 
0.258 
0.331 
0.300 
0.116 
0.62 
 
0.70 
6 
0.210 
0.337 
0.228 
0.153 
0.261 
0.58 
0.60 
Square  root   of    AVE in bold in the diagonal. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Business Management Review Journal Vol.11(2) 
 
 
43 
 
 
Another approach to assessing discriminant   validity is to examine the factor 
reliabilities and the inter-factor correlations. For adequate discriminant validity, the 
reliability coefficients should be greater than the correlation coefficients (Anderson and 
Gerbing 1988) in Siekpe (2005) as evidenced above.         
 
Satisfaction with Government efforts to eliminate the constraints 
 
 
In order fulfil third objective of the study, i.e. establish whether the government was 
doing something significant about the elimination of these constraints, the perceptions 
of the SMEs were sought.  Respondents were requested to rate the extent to which they 
were satisfied with the way the government has handled the elimination of these 
constraints on a 7 point likert scale, ranging from 1 “not at all” to   7 “  strongly  
agree”. This overall question has been used in many satisfaction studies (e.g. 
Parasuramman et al 1988). Tables 6 and 7 below present the results.  
 
 
Statistics 
 
Table 6: To What extent are you satisfied with the way the government has 
handled the elimination of these constraints? 
 
N                                
 
Mean 
Std. Deviation 
Variance 
Skewness 
Std. Error or Skewness 
Kurtosis 
Std. Error of Kurtosis 
100 
0 
3.32 
1.64 
2.68 
.482 
.241 
-567 
.478 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Wasswa Katono Isaac 
 
44 
 
Table: 7:   To What extent are you satisfied with the way the government has 
handled the elimination of these constraints? 
 
Frequency  
Percent 
Valid 
Percent 
Cumulative 
Percent 
Valid   Not at All 
            Slightly Moderate Extent 
            Moderate extent 
            Moderately Large Extent 
            Large Extent 
            Very Large Extent 
           Extremely Large Extent 
           Total 
13 
22 
26 
14 
13 
8 
4 
100 
13.0 
22.0 
26.0 
14.0 
13.0 
8.0 
4.0 
100.0 
13.0 
22.0 
26.0 
14.0 
13.0 
8.0 
4.0 
100.0 
13.0 
35.0 
61.0 
75.0 
88.0 
96.0 
100.0 
                                                                                                            
The tables show  the perceptions of the SMEs regarding the government is handling of 
the constraints .The statistics show that the data is negatively skewed which means that 
most of the respondents are not satisfied with the way the government is handling the 
constraints. This is particularly obvious in view of the findings in table 4. 
DISCUSSION 
Firstly, it is imperative to note that many LDCs have little capacity within government 
and the private sector to identify the constraints that hinder SMEs from going 
international  (Brenton and Hoppe, 2006). Secondly, all the 6 identified factors and 
their underlying dimensions are important distinct constraints that hinder Ugandan 
SMEs from accessing the AGOA market.   However, Factor analysis reveals  (Table 4) 
that lack of middle managers, infrastructure, technology, marketing issues, lack of 
export credit, and governance issues  (in order of importance)  are the most crucial 
constraints facing Ugandan SMEs in the AGOA market. These findings are in 
consonance with the clusters hypothesized by Tesform and Lutz (2006). Lack of 
middle managers, inadequate export credit and marketing issues are similar to the 
internal company barriers /forces identified by Tesform and Lutz, while infrastructure, 
technology and governance issues can be clustered as external forces in their model.  
  
In agreement with Yang et al 1992( lack of personnel to administer exporting activities) 
and  the African Competitiveness Report (2005), this study finds that lack of middle 
managers (and a poor entrepreneurial culture) are the factors that most hinder exports 
to  the AGOA  market. Although Universities churn out many managers every year, 
many of them do not live up to the expectations of the employers as established in a 
study by Asiimwe et al., ( 2000)  on local government in Uganda.  In this study, 
university graduates were found to be lacking practical skills, had low motivation, 
lacked dedication, were unable to solve problems, had narrow focus and lacked cross-

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Business Management Review Journal Vol.11(2) 
 
 
45 
 
cutting   multi-displinary and integrative knowledge.  Another   problem in this regard 
is the lack of a good work ethic among Ugandan managers as postulated by Ntayi 
(2005:156), that work as a determinant of personal value and identity and as an 
indicator of good character and good morals is disappearing out in Uganda.  
 
 For example,   graduates   who find a job after years of street walking spend more time 
contemplating greener pastures than doing their assignment in the first week of their 
employment (Twinamatsiko in Ntayi 2005).  Therefore it is not surprising that many 
firms in many sectors (e.g. flowers and textiles) hire non-Ugandan middle managers. 
However, the issue of entrepreneurship is controversial given that Walter  et al., (2003) 
established that Uganda is the most entrepreneurial country in the world in terms of 
necessity and opportunity entrepreneurship.  The former is involuntary and is driven by 
necessity while the latter is voluntary and motivated by the pursuit of perceived 
opportunities (Reynolds et al., in Walter et al., 2003: 20).  Uganda is reported as being   
three times as entrepreneurial as the USA, yet Uganda is a poor country. The likely 
explanation in this case could be in terms of government policy as a factor limiting  
entrepreneurship. Walter et al., (2003) argue that the regulatory and administrative 
burden associated with entrepreneurship is too high in Uganda. The tax system is not 
conducive to the development of entrepreneurial firms and it seems government 
understanding of entrepreneurship is not sufficient. Thus the strong entrepreneurial 
spirit is wasted if the conditions handicap entrepreneurship in trying to compete at a 
global level. As Kasekende et al., (2002) observe, there is a positive correlation 
between a good policy environment and economic growth. Therefore, it is apparent that 
designing  policies and programme that promote the growth of SMEs must be the 
cornerstone of any growth strategy for this country. 
 
 It is universally agreed that for policy coherence and overall effectiveness, trade policy 
should be mainstreamed into a country’s overall development strategy (Oyejide 2004).  
While government has taken steps to streamline trade matters into the overall 
development plan (PEAP- Poverty Eradication Action Plan), there is a need to also 
focus on the capacity of the individual exporters who are behind the SMEs.  In this 
respect Ugandan exporters to AGOA have benefited a lot from the USA trade hub in 
Nairobi. On the other hand,   marketing issues stand out as important in affecting 
exports to AGOA,   consistent with Katsikeas and Morgan (1994), who underscore the 
importance of organizational capacity to execute the marketing function. In the case of 
apparel for example, American firms have a lot of bargaining power compared with the 
garment producer, who must comply with given specifications in terms of sizes, 
labeling, packaging etc. (USAID Report, 2001). Thus access to market information, 
marketing skills, familiarity with global best practices and knowledge of the export 
market become critical factors for success, in agreement with Weaver and Pack (1990); 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Wasswa Katono Isaac 
 
46 
 
Bordur (1986); and Karafakioglu (1986).  These factors combine to worsen an already 
precarious situation and account for many lost opportunities.  Thus steps must be taken 
to equip SMEs with knowledge about marketing issues in order for them not to lose out 
on matters that they would otherwise control. Today the world is “a global village” and 
the environment is more competitive than ever before.  Specifically, access to 
information is critical because inadequate information or information received late 
spells doom for the SMEs. 
  
The findings indicate that availability of export credit is a critical factor in the bid by 
SMEs to export to AGOA, in agreement with Tesform and Lutz.  Beyene (2002) also 
finds that access to finance is the biggest constraint facing SSA SMEs.   Many SMEs 
lack the capacity to fund large orders on their own. Late payments and bank red tape 
cannot be ruled out. However, another related problem is the high interest rates that 
prevail in Uganda as well as the fluctuating dollar rates. This situation is not surprising 
since the high cost of capital and risks are prevalent in many African countries 
(Kasekende et al., 2002).   Certainly the government   needs to set up special credit 
lines for exporters. 
 
Technology is a major constraint because it greatly influences value addition, and 
hence the ability of the products to compete with those from other countries through 
innovation. The problem of inappropriate technology is acute, because in many 
instances manufactures find it difficult to acquire modern technology which would 
make their products competitive.   Technology influences the ability of firms to be 
innovative, utilize economies of scale and thus gain a competitive edge in the market.  
For example ,production systems used to mass-produce apparel in industries around the 
world are still foreign in Ugandan textile companies (USAID Report, 2001). Thus there 
is need for technology transfer from the developed countries to the LDCs.  High 
transaction costs resulting from poor technology are worsened by poor infrastructure in 
terms of transport, and   energy.   In addition to the high power tariffs, the current 
power   shortage which the country is facing has made load shedding a daily 
occurrence, thus forcing many firms to use generators, further raising production costs. 
However, reforms in the telecommunication sector that have brought the number of 
licensed national operators to 4 have greatly reduced tariffs much to the relief of 
exporters.  
 
As noted by Bigman (2002), successful implementation of policy reforms depends on a 
country’s institutions of governance. While the government has taken measures to 
combat corruption through the Inspector General of Government, improve democratic 
space and observe the rule of law, the 20-year old rebellion has diverted important 
resources in terms of human beings, money and time, and displaced millions of people 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Business Management Review Journal Vol.11(2) 
 
 
47 
 
from their homes and productive activities. Such resources could have been put to 
better use in terms of infrastructure, technology, and market support. Last but not least, 
rules of origin are a major factor determining whether AGOA contributes to the 
development of  local industries in LDCs.  As Hayashi et al., (2004) note, if the rules 
are too strict, AGOA would discourage the vertical integration of production chains 
CONCLUSION 
This study set out to investigate the barriers that hinder Ugandan exports from reaching 
the AGOA market, with a view to ranking them in order of importance. This would 
help the government in the prioritization of interventions to mitigate these constraints 
in the light of the limited resource envelop.  Given that trade preferences that have been 
granted to ACP states for the last 30 years by the European Union (EU) under 
Yaoundé, Lome and Cotonou have already expirer the opportunity presented by AGOA 
should not be wasted. 
 
 Against this background, this study makes a contribution in this direction by 
identifying the most important constraints facing Uganda in the AGOA market so that 
more emphasis is put on them.  In general the identified constraints are interwoven, i.e. 
one constraint leading to another or contributing somehow to its impact, be they 
internal or external factors.  In totality, these barriers contribute to the high trade 
related costs facing Ugandan exporters to AGOA. Besides the most common 
constraints in the extant literature like   technology and infrastructure, entrepreneurship, 
and   limited knowledge of global best practices, poor marketing skills are also 
important constraints facing Ugandan SMEs in the AGOA market. It is difficult to be 
competitive in a market which one does not understand. Hence there is need to improve 
the marketing expertise of the exporters. Further, most of the respondents were just 
moderately satisfied with the way the government is handling these constraints, 
implying that there is a need for more effort in this direction. In addition to making an 
effort to integrate trade matters into the PEAP, government is currently carrying out a 
series of studies in order to improve the country’s export capacity.  It is hoped that such 
efforts and others like this study   will help to put the focus on the elimination of the 
most important barriers facing exporters.  However, government alone cannot change 
the situation, thus there is need for a concerted effort on the part of all stakeholders, 
including   academic institutions and   civil society. Since weaknesses in institutions of 
governance undermine domestic reforms and thus the business environment in which 
SMEs operate, there must be a concerted effort to improve this area. There is also a 
great need to put an end to all forms of rebellion in the country, and stem resource 
waste through combating corruption.       
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Wasswa Katono Isaac 
 
48 
 
REFERENCE  
Asiimwe, D., Ezati, E., Mugisha, F., Onweng, T., & Nsabagasani, X. (2000): Human 
resource demand assessment from the perspective of the district. Kampala 
MISR 
 
Barnes, S. (2007): Virtual worlds as a medium for advertising. The DATABASE for 
advances in Information Systems. Volume 38   Number 4. 
                                               
Beck .T, Demirguc-Kunt, A, and Levine, R. (2003): Small and medium enterprise 
growth and poverty: cross-country evidence. World Bank Policy Research 
working Paper 3178. World Bank, Washington, USA.  
 
Beyene, A. (2002): Enhancing the competitiveness and productivity of SMEs in Africa: 
An analysis of differential Roles of National Governments through improved 
support services. Africa Development, Vol. xxvii No.3. 2002 
 
Biggs, T. (2002): Is small beautiful and worthy of subsidy? International Finance 
Corporation, Washington, USA. 
 
Bigman, D (2002) Globalization and the Developing Countries. Oxon. CABI 
Publishing  
 
Brenton .P and Kenzuki (2004): “The initial and potential impact of preferential access 
to the US market under AGOA”. Policy Working PaperNo3262, World Bank, 
Washington, DC 
                                                      
Brenton, P. & Hoppe, M. (2006): AGOA, Exports and development in SSA.   Policy 
Research Paper 3936. The World Bank. 
 
Cortina, J .M (1993):  What is coefficient alpha? An examination of theory and 
applications .Journal of Applied Social Psychology 78(1).pp98-104 
 
Corey W.C (2006): Small African Business Lag in Reaping AGOA Benefits. 
  
http://uninfo.state.gov/archives/display.html 
 
Coolican. H (2004): Research Methods and Statistics in Psychology. London. Hodder 
and Stoughton 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Business Management Review Journal Vol.11(2) 
 
 
49 
 
ECA (2001), Enhancing the competitiveness of SMEs in Africa: “A Strategic 
Framework for support services”, Economic Commission for Africa 
DMD/PSD/TP/00/04 
 
Freeman, J. and Lawley, M. (2005): “Export Performance: A framework for 
comparison of regional and metropolitan exporters”, ANZMAC – 2005 
Conference:  Marketing in international and cross-cultural environments. 
 
Francois, J., Hoekman, B., & Manchini, M. (2005): Preference erosion and multilateral 
trade liberalization.  Tinbergen Institute Discussion Paper. TI 2005 – 073/2 
 
Greenland. S, Coshall. J and Combe .I (2005): Evaluating service quality and customer 
satisfaction in emerging   markets. International Journal of Consumer Studies. 
Vol. 30 issue 6.   Pp582-590 
 
Gumede, V and Rasmussen, K. (2002): Small manufacturing enterprises and exporting 
in South Africa: a preliminary assessment of key export success factors. 
Journal of Small Business and Enterprise Development Vol 9 No 2 pp161-171 
       
Haggblade, S., Hazell, P. and Reardon, T. (2002): Strategies for stimulating Poverty 
alleviating growth in the rural non-farm economy in developing countries. 
Discussion Paper No. 92.The World Bank, Washington, USA.   
  
Hair .J.F., Anderson R.E., Tathem R.L, & Black W.C. (1998):  Multivariate Data 
Analysis.  Englewood Cliffs. Prentice Hall. 
 
Hallberg, K. (2001): A market–orientated strategy for small and medium-scale 
Enterprise. IFC Discussion Paper No. 40.  International Finance Corporation. 
 
Hayashi, M, Bartel, C. & Monge Roffaredo, L. (2004): AGOA. African Technology 
Development 
Forum. 
http://www.atdforum.org/spip.php?article 
94  
(10.2.2008)  
 
Hoskyns, C. (2006): Linking Gender and International Trade Policy. Is interaction 
Possible? CSGR, University of Warwick. 
 
Hosmer, D.Z. & Lemeshaw, S. (1989): Applied Logistical Regression .New York. Wiley 
and Sons. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Wasswa Katono Isaac 
 
50 
 
International Trade Center (ITC) (2001), Converting LDC export opportunities into 
business: A strategic response. ITC, Geneva. 
 
Jaffet, S. and Henson, S. (2004): Standards and agro–food exports from developing 
countries: Rebalancing the debate. Policy Working paper 3348, World Bank, 
Washington, DC 
 
Kaiser, H.F. (1974): An index of factorial simplicity. Psychometrika, (39):31-36. 
 
Kline, P. (2000): Handbook of Psychological Testing .2nd
 
 Edition. London. Routledge. 
Kasekende, L.A., Atingi-Ego, M. & Sebudde, R.K. (2002): The African growth 
experience. Uganda Country Study. Work in Progress. 
http://www.gdnet.org/pdf/draft_country_studies/Uganda-
Atingi_FR.pdf.(15.2.2008) 
 
Katsikeas, C.S and Morgan, R.E (1994): “Differences in perceptions of export 
problems based on firm size and export market experience”, European 
Journal of Marketing Vol. 28 pp. 17 – 35 
 
Kwesiga, C. (2003): Seminar presentation on AGOA: Uganda’s response and 
challenges. Kampala. AGOA Country Office. 
 
Leonidou, L. (2004): An analysis of the barriers hindering small business export 
development. Journal of Small Business Management Vol 42 No.3 pp 229-302 
 
Liedholm .C and Mead, D. (1987): Small-scale industries in developing countries: 
Empirical   evidence   and   policy implications. Michigan State University 
International Development Papers No. 9. Michigan State University, East 
Lansing, USA 
 
Loewenthal, K.M (2001):  An Introduction to Psychological Tests and Scales .2nd
     
 
Edition. New York. Psychological Press. 
Low. P; Pier martini, R & Richenting, J (2005): Multilateral solutions to the erosion of 
non–reciprocal preferences in NAMA. Working    Paper ERSD-2005-05, 
WTO, Geneva. 
  
McQueen .D.  (2004): Small-scale enterprises and sustainable development.  
Policy Discussion Paper .Edinburgh IIED/SDC/DFID 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Business Management Review Journal Vol.11(2) 
 
 
51 
 
 
Mutahunga E. (2006): “Mainstreaming trade into national development plans.” A 
presentation at   the 4th
 
 Course on Introduction to Trade and Trade Policy 
Analysis. Kampala. MITI 
Ntayi, J.M. (2005): Work ethic, locus of control and sales force performance. Journal 
of African Business Vol. 6 Numbers 1/2   International Business Press. 
 
Ng, F and Yeats    (2000): On the recent trade performance of Sub-Saharan African 
Countries: Cause for Hope or More of the same? African   Region Working 
Paper. World Bank, Washington. DC. 
 
Neupert, K.E; Baughn, C.C and Dao, L.T (2006): “SME export challenges in 
transitional and developed economies”, Journal for Small Business and 
Enterprise Development, Vol. 13 No. 4, Pg. 535 – 545 
 
Norusis, M.J. (1988) SPSS – X Advanced Statistics Guide. SPSS Inc. Chicago. 
 
Nunnally J.C and Bernstein I.H (1994): Psychometric Theory, New York MacGraw 
Hill. 
 
OECD, (2000): Small and Medium Enterprises Outlook. 2nd
 
 edition, Paris France. 
Ohtswamah, C. (2008):20 years later NRM fails where it mattered. The Independent 
.Issue 4 Jan-Feb 2008. www.independent.co.ug 
 
Oyejide, A.T (2005): Relaxing export supply capacity constraints and promoting export 
expansion and diversification in Africa. The role  of special export 
development strategies.( Retrieved 6/11/07.) 
http://www.afdb.org/pls/portal/url/ITEM?22FE8F94631A299E04C00A0C3D
3.  
Parasuramman A., Zeithamal V.A., and Berry, L.L. (1998): SERVQUAL:  
A multiple–item scale for measuring consumer perceptions of service quality. 
Journal of Retailing 64(1):12-40. 
 
Reinartz, W.  Kraft, M., & Hoyer, W. (2003): Measuring the customer relationship 
construct and linking its performance outcomes. INSEAD Working Paper 
Series 2003/02/MKT. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Wasswa Katono Isaac 
 
52 
 
Siekpe S.J (2005): An Examination of the multi-dimensionality of the flow construct in 
a computer mediated environment. Journal of Electronic Commerce 
Research. 6 (1) 
 
Sorebo, O Christensen, G.E, & Eikebrokk, T.R (2004): The impact of purposeful end-
user computing activities on job performance: An empirical investigation. 
Journal of Research and Practice in Information Technology Vol. 36 No. 2 
 
Stiglitz, J.E and Charlton, A. (2005): Fair Trade for All:- How Trade can Promote 
Development
 
: Oxford University Press, London. 
Tesfom, G. and Lutz, C. (2006): “A classification of export marketing problems of 
small and medium-sized manufacturing firms in developing countries”. 
International Journal of Emerging Markets, Vol. 1 No.3 pp. 265 – 281 
 
Todaro, M.P. (1995): Economics for a Developing World
 
. Longman. London 
Todd, R.P and Javalgi, R. (2007): “Internationalization of SMEs in India”, 
International Journal of Emerging Markets, Vol.2 No.2, pp. 166 – 180 
 
Tupy, L.M (2005), “Trade liberalization and poverty reduction in Sub-Sahara Africa”, 
Policy Analysis No. 557, CATO Institute, Washington 
  
UEPB (2005). http://www.ugandaexportsonline.com/s  
 
UNCTAD (2004): Beyond conventional wisdom in development policy. An 
intellectual history of UNCTAD (1964 – 2004). UNCTAD/ EDM/ 2004/4 
      
USAID (2001): AGOA   Textile & garment -what future for Uganda’s exports? Nathan 
–MSI (OUT-PCE-1-807-980016) 
                                                                        
US Government (2005) Africa Competitiveness Report. 
 
US Government (2000) AGOA Act   Implementation Guide.   
 
Walter, T.   Balunywa, W., Rosa, P., Sserwanga, A., Barabas, S., Namatovu, R. (2003): 
Global Entrepreneurship Monitor. Kampala. MUBS. 
 
World Bank (2000): Can Africa Claim the 21st
 
 Century? World Bank, Washington DC. 
Zachary, P.G. (2008): Should the map of Africa be redefined? The Independent Issue 4 
Jan-Feb 2008. www.independent.co.ug 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Business Management Review Journal Vol.11(2) 
 
 
53 
 
END NOTE 
                                                 
 
1   Average Variance Extracted  (AVE )  is given by   : AVE =Σλi²/{Σλi² + Σ(1- λi²)} 
,where Σλi² is the sum of the squared loadings, while  Σ(1- λi²) is the sum of the 
residual variances. 
